In this video, I will tell you the story of
human philosophy encompassing an incredible.2500 years of philosophical history. By the
end of this video, you will know all the basic.philosophical ideas, schools and approaches,
as well as some of the most influential philosophers.from around the world. The video has 4 major
parts and each with 2 or 3 sections, just.like chapters in books..In part 1, I will answer the most fundamental
question. Why are humans the only species.that have invented philosophy? Or where does
philosophy really come from? Also how has.philosophy evolved in the past 2500 years?
And why philosophy has so many branches such.as ontology, epistemology, rationalism, empiricism,
humanism, utilitarianism, existentialism,.postmodernism and more?.In part 2, I will look at the origin and differences
between eastern philosophy and western philosophy..Why one emphasises spirituality, and changing
yourself, while the other emphasises rationality,.and changing the world . I will look at the
Greek giants of Socrates, Plato and Aristotle,.as well as the three giants of eastern philosophy,
the Buddha, Lao Tzu and Confucius..In part 3, I will look at the philosophy of
life and human civilisation. Is the purpose.of human civilisation to promote equality
or competition? Is the purpose of human life.to seek knowledge or happiness? I will discuss
philosophers such as Sun Tsu, Machiavelli,.Thomas Hobbes, Jean-Jacque Rousseau, Voltaire,
Erasmus, Michel de Montaigne, Francis Bacon,.Martin Heidegger, Michel Foucault, and Bertrand
Russell..In part 4, I will tackle the question of knowledge
and human motivation. How do we know reality?.I will discuss the school of European rationalism
versus British empiricism and Kant’s reconciliation.of the two. After Kant two distinct schools
of philosophy emerged to explain human motivation..One sociological and one psychological. Hegel’s
sociological philosophy argued we are motivated.by historical forces, while Schopenhauer’s
psychological philosophy argued we are motivated.by a blind subconscious will..So get yourself a strong cup of coffee and
some popcorn and let Fiction Beast take you.on a journey of how homo sapiens’ huge brain
terrified their tiny heart. As a result, they.invented all sorts of beasts from gods to
demons to fairies in an attempt to comfort.themselves and explain the world. But also
invented philosophy to answer 3 deep existential.questions. Why am I here? Where have I come
from? And Where am I going? To answer your.first question, you’re here because you’re
curious about philosophy. So let’s begin..Why philosophy?
What’s philosophy? How did we come about.it? Why do we need it? And what’s happened
to philosophy today? And what’s the future.of philosophy? Today I will answer all these
questions as I discuss the rise and fall of.human philosophy. .We humans utilize three massive weapons to
navigate the world around us. And they’re.all built-in inside us. As a result, we humans
are the most sophisticated animal that has.ever lived on earth, which is incredible.
Next time someone complains about the world.being unfair, remind them of these amazing
tools that every human has, while other animals.don’t have all of them. What are they? .Like all animals, the first and the most important
tool is instinct, which most of the time subconsciously.shapes our behaviours. We have three basic
instincts: food, sex and company. Our first.and most important instinct is survival. We
spent a minimum of 8 hours or 1/3 of our day.working to earn bread. Imagine, if we didn’t
have this instinct, how would you motivate.yourself to work? Or worse still how would
you motivate others to work? Our survival.instinct goes beyond food, we instinctively
avoid danger or anything that threatens our.life. Do you know what happened to creatures
who didn’t have survival instinct? They.needed a self-help book to motivate themselves. .After working 8 hours, in the evenings, we
spend hours prowling our city centre bars.and restaurants in search of a mate or courting
a mate. This is the instinct to procreate..Of course nowadays we chase a mate for recreational
purposes. The sexual urge is so strongly wired.in us, especially men, that we do it despite
the fact that most of us have no plan to have.children. The giant panda is going instinct
because they have become too lethargic to.have sex, so the Chinese government spends
lots of money to make more pandas. Imagine.our ancestors didn’t want to procreate.
We wouldn’t be here. Our third basic instinct.is seeking the company of other humans. While
men have stronger sexual urge, women have.a stronger urge for company. Without this
instinct, we would all end up alone and perhaps.would never have a civilisation. Basically
our instincts tell us what to do most of the.time, so we don’t have to really think about
it or twist our brain to motivate ourselves.to do those things. We instinctively seek
food, a partner, and the company of others,.which allow our conscious brain to save energy
on something else. .The second weapon in how we navigate life
is our emotions, which fluctuates day-to-day.and allows us to understand ourselves and
those around us. Our emotions give us hints.about our environment. Depending on the time
and place we feel angry, sad, frightened,.content, happy and ecstatic. If instincts
are like a climate that remains stable long-term,.our emotions are like whether that regulates
our daily life. Our instinctive urges push.us to do things to achieve what we want, but
our environment says yes or no. For example.in seeking a partner, we want someone but
that person wants someone else. Or worse still.our survival is threatened, our emotions allows
us to cope. So emotions allow us to grow,.change and adapt to a new place or person
somewhat quickly. Our emotions are incredibly.powerful in motivating us to do things right
away. Negative or positive emotions help us.grow and move on and seek a better environment.
In fact, one of the reasons humans conquered.the world is because we are not happy where
we are for a long time. Apart from seeking.food and safety, we are also motivated by
boredom. So our emotions give our conscious.mind more free time to do other things. Instead
our emotions do the job for us in motivating.us to move, grow and change. .Our third, and perhaps the most sophisticated
weapon we have is reason, which is the basis.of science and technology which allow civilisations
to flourish. This makes us different from.other animals, our ability to make rational
decisions based on informed knowledge and.calculated risk. Instinct and emotions are
hardwired in us from birth but rationality.is mostly learned through direct experiences
of our own, as well as knowledge passed on.from our parents and ancestors either orally
or in writing. In fact, our rationality is.so powerful that it can regulate our instincts
and emotions. For example, our ability to.delay gratification allows us to forgo our
present pleasure for future and long-term.pleasure. Of course, not all humans are born
equal when it comes to delayed gratification..Some want their cake right away. Some can
wait a bit longer. But rationality is an incredible.tool for us to look long-term, not just here
and now. Today we live in a modern world,.or in the age of rationality. All our modern
technological conveniences are the result.of rational science. .To sum up, humans are hardwired with three
incredible tools: instincts, emotions and.reason. But where does philosophy fit in this? .The word philosophy in Greek means the love
of wisdom. So the first true human science.was philosophy. In fact philosophers were
the first rational thinkers who replaced the.wise old men or women. They were career thinkers,
meaning they were known for their thoughts.and wisdoms. So philosophy at its core is
a structured rational thinking. In other words,.its foundation is rationality. .Why? We humans developed a more sophisticated
brain, perhaps the discovery of fire allowed.us to cook our food, so we could digest our
food much quicker as a result we had more.time to think. When you’re busy, you have
no time to think. In fact, I do my thinking.while in the toilet, because I don’t take
my smartphone with me. But this brain, good.in many ways, also came with a disadvantage.
It allowed us to develop acute consciousness.and self-awareness. The more we understood
our environment and our own existence, the.more we started to brood and ask some difficult
questions. One reason, today we control our.brain by keeping ourselves busy or hooked
on something, like work or entertainment or.our smart phone. With this thinking brain,
came the most devastating awareness of all..Death. Other animals might know death when
it comes to them, so they instinctively avoid.dangers. But we human beasts know death from
an early age. As rational animals, we learn.from the past to anticipate the future. In
other words, we anticipate death. Despite.trying not to think about it, we have this
fear in the back of our mind. .So this brain of ours became powerful enough
to ask important questions. Why are we here?.What is reality and how we know it. Early
humans couldn’t explain the world, life,.the things around them, especially the sun,
the light, seasons, thunder, fire etc. But.the most important question was why death.
This is the main theme of the oldest surviving.human story, The Epic of Gilgamesh, written
3-4,000 years ago, in which the hero is seeking.immortality but unfortunately he fails. So
to console himself, he builds a city so people.could remember him. Other humans invented
gods and religions as security blankets. In.fact the fear of death is so strong in humans
that nearly every religion has extended life.to after-life so death couldn’t scare us
anymore. You could say that human life is.so short that we have to have an after-life.
However, today most people don’t believe.in after-life. .Politically or practically, early human societies
were ruled by the strongest among them or.a group of strong men. Then through the passage
of time, generations later, myths, legends.and stories about these strong people were
created. As time passed, these legends and.myths gave these early strong people titanic
god-like roles. As Italo Calvino once said,.folk tales are told and retold so many times
that they become like pebbles, smooth, shiny.and perfect. Of course the earliest gods were
usually non-human phenomena such as the sun,.thunder, light, dark, earth and so forth but
over time they took a semi-human form. Later.these ideas became more sophisticated in the
form of religion that told sophisticated stories.about the origin of life and also explained
death through after-life, resurrection or.reincarnation. .But philosophers tried to explain without
relying on gods and the supernatural. So they.used reason to ask two important questions,
which became the two main pillars of philosophy..One, what is really out there, and two, how
we know it. So ontology asks what’s reality.and what things exist or don’t exist, and
epistemology asks how we know the world. So.philosophy became a rational tool for humans
to understand the world, the meaning of life.and how to navigate the world correctly. So
early philosophers studied all sciences, from.stars to frogs and everything in between.
But if you boiled it down, the three main.subjects for philosophers were the physical
world, the origin of life and the human mind..In other words, what is the world and how
does it work? What’s life and how works?.And what’s the human mind and how does it
work? So remember that these three main topics.also play philosophy’s own downfall. .As time passed, philosophy became too big
and too sophisticated so it gave birth to.other disciplines. In 15th and 16th century
Europe, the first baby was born. For example,.Galileo, Copernicus, and Newton were the pioneers
of physics, so physicists took over the job.of studying the world, the universe, stars,
planets and matter as a whole. A big load.was off the philosophers’ shoulders now,
so they focused more on metaphysics, i.e..the meaning of life and the property of the
human mind. .Then in the 18th and 19th century, however,
another baby was born. Biology took over the.job of studying life. Philosophers no longer
needed to dissect frogs or understand the.human body. An important biologist was Charles
Darwin, whose theory of evolution by natural.selection revolutionised everything we knew
about life and its origin. So philosophers.were left to only focus on the human mind. .But unfortunately they would snatch that away
from philosophers too. In the late 19th century.and early 20th century, philosophy gave birth
to its last baby. We call it psychology that.took over the job of studying the human mind.
Two big names are Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung.who both placed importance on the subconscious
and unconscious mind as greater motivation.in human behaviour. So philosophers didn’t
have to diagnose the human mind anymore. Phew,.for centuries philosophers were doing the
jobs of four people, a physicist, a biologist,.a psychologist and a philosopher. Now they
could enjoy a bit more free time and just.sit in their comfy chairs and be philosophers.
After all, everyone has to retire at some.point. .But retirement is a tough period in anyone’s
life. Without things to do, you either face.an existential crisis, or you become lazy
and rot away. So today philosophers have become.a bit lazy on the whole. But also they are
a bit out of touch because physics, biology.and psychology have become too specialised
so philosophers don’t have the time to rigorously.study all three disciplines. Also they don’t
want to get their hands dirty dissecting frogs.or spend hours staring at a telescope to study
the stars or spend time with mentally ill.patients. .So the big question is: what is the purpose
of philosophy today? Should it unify physics,.biology, and psychology once again? Or should
it find a new path for itself. Nietzsche,.the first to fully diagnose the problem of
western philosophy, took philosophy back to.the cave through his Zarathustra who instead
of prophesying for a single god and the divine,.tells us about a new type of human, ubermensch
who instead of following social values, create.new ones through their artistic and philosophical
works, like the early humans who went to the.cave to gain wisdom. Nietzsche criticised
philosophy for being too rational, not passionate.enough. Philosophy is an old man who has produced
many amazing kids and now feels lost for purpose..Why? It’s very simple. It lacks passion.
Philosophy started as a rational tool, but.it was also its downfall. As we saw, sciences
like physics, biology took over the rational.side of philosophy and psychology took over
the irrational side of philosophy to put it.very crudely. What’s left? Not much. Is
philosophy completely doomed? Well, not quite..I have an answer. .Earlier I mentioned the three big human weapons:
instincts, emotions and reason. Biology and.Psychology are taking care of the instinct
and the unconscious. Literature takes care.of human emotions through storytelling. And
science takes care of reason. So is philosophy.without a chair now? Not quite. My solution
is human intuition. There you go. A new philosophy.should be based on human intuition. .What’s intuition? In a nutshell, instincts
are mostly unconscious, reason is mostly conscious.and emotions are somewhere in the middle.
Where does intuition fit in? It’s somewhere.between instinct, the hard rock foundation
and reason, the hard rock roof over your head..So intuition is fluid between two solid surfaces
and also right next to emotions, which is.more volatile and even more fluid. Intuition
is a layer deeper than rationality and a level.above instinct. So the new philosophy should
be based on intuition because it has direct.access to instinct but also reason. So in
a way it fits right between the unconscious.psychology and conscious rational sciences
like physics and biology. Scientists don’t.utilise intuition, so it’s a perfect tool
for philosophy to understand and explain the.world. .Why intuition? An intuition-based philosophy
can equip us with a better weapon to cope.with suffering. Rationality through sciences
provides us with security, physical utility.and comfort through medicine and technology,
like a traditional father would. Science builds.your house, produces food and clothes. Emotions
provide you with love and care like a traditional.mother would, which is literature and stories.
Intuition provides you the ability to have.insights, original ideas, inventiveness, and
the ability to connect dots so you have a.goal or mission in life or relevance in society.
Intuition is fast, snappy and in-the-moment.insight or genius that allows societies move
forwards. In fact most inventions and discoveries.can be attributed to intuition, not rational
thinking. Reason is slow, instinct is too.rigid and emotions clouds your judgment in
the moment, but intuition is hit and miss..When it hits, it sparks a new light..So, is there a philosopher who bases his philosophy
on intuition? I’m glad you asked. Yes, there.is. Henri Bergson, a French philosopher, argued
that intuition can vitalise life and gives.us a new spark. As Nietzsche argued, reason-based
philosophy has become too stale. For Bergson,.intuition is the closest thing to a direct
experience of something. For example, if you.want to know a city, you can read all the
maps and photographs of all the buildings,.but it cannot be as good as if you walk the
streets of that city. For example, you can.never fully convey the taste of an apple to
someone who has never eaten an apple. That.intuitive experience is the closest we humans
get to experiencing the taste of an apple..So intuition takes us back to our nature,
while reason is moving us away from nature..Of course, Bergson is famous for his philosophy
of time, creativity and humour. He thought.intuition and life go together. We know reason
tries to tame our natural instincts and emotions..Rightly so, but it can also go too far in
taming us into a docile animal with no vitality..Bergson’s philosophy is called vitalism
because he wanted to liberate us from the.chain of reason. .So philosophy started as a rational tool to
understand the world, life and the human mind..Then it gave away those roles to physicists,
biologists and psychologists. Now it’s almost.become redundant so we need a new intuitive
philosophy. .But to really understand philosophy, and where
it stands today, we need to know the history.of philosophy, its various schools, approaches,
eastern and western, humanists and animalists,.rationalists and empiricists, social philosophy
vs individual philosophy. So in the following.episodes, I will go through human philosophy
to give you an overview of the entire 2,500.years of human philosophy. .Next, I will explain some of the common philosophical
terms like what is the difference between.ontology vs epistemology, physics vs metaphysics,
rationalism vs empiricism, humanism vs utilitarianism,.existentialism vs postmodernism, and more.
Stay tuned. .Philosophy in 17 Words.Previously I discussed that philosophy at
its core deals with two fundamental questions..What is and how we know it. Those two questions
in turn, lead to other questions, like how.we should live our lives. So in this segment
I will look at some important philosophical.terms, questions and various branches of philosophy.
For example, what are the differences between.ontology and epistemology, or between reason
and logic, or between humanism and utilitarianism,.or between existentialism and postmodernism.
What is metaphysics? What is the difference.between rationalism and empiricism? And what’s
phenomenology? And most importantly why we.grapple with the biggest question today between
egalitarianism and elitism. .Ontology vs Epistemology: Early philosophy
was based on two main questions. What is reality.which became ontology and how we know it which
is epistemology. So ontology asks what is.and what is not, and epistemology asks how
we know the thing that exists or doesn’t.exist. For example, according to ontological
philosophy, humans are either animals or not.animals. If not animals, therefore humans
are sacred and fundamentally valuable. It’s.accepted as a foundation based on your belief,
so murdering a human being is one of the most.serious crimes. So thou shalt not kill is
based on the ontological notion that human.life is sacred. So ontological philosophy
gave birth to sciences in order to understand.the world, nature and human biology. Aristotle
is usually considered the father of modern.sciences. Epistemology, on the other hand,
is about how we gather knowledge. A good example.is how we know what we know. Immanuel Kant
said we can never know reality as it is, but.we only know things on a limited level. Why?
Because everything has to funnel through the.human mind, which is structured in a way that
categorizes things in a certain way. In other.words we humans put a structure onto the world
based on how the human mind works, and the.world in itself is unknowable to us because
we cannot get out our human mind. We can never.know the thing in itself. Michel Foucault
went a step further saying that knowledge.is power, meaning those in possession of science
and technology have immense power over others..He said there is no impartial or power-free
science. Knowledge is a tool in the hands.of the powerful. I will discuss this more
later. So to sum up, ontology is the philosophy.of existence, while epistemology is the philosophy
of knowledge of that existence. .Metaphysics vs physics: Physics was part of
philosophical studies until a few centuries.ago before it became a separate discipline.
Physics mainly studies matter, from the smallest.particles to the biggest stars. Metaphysics,
however, is the study of what is beyond the.physical world, like ideas, forms, and soul,
which is closer to religious ideas of god.and and spirits. A scientist might say human
consciousness is rooted in matter and would.not exist without brain cells. A metaphysician,
on the other hand, might say, consciousness.is independent of matter, either comes from
a higher power or the universe itself is conscious. So.physics is the study of physical matter while
metaphysic is the study non-physical entities..Reason vs Logic: Logic has its origins in
mathematics. For example 2+2=4 is logical.because it follows a very rigid rule that
gives you one answer. But logic is also used.as the language of philosophy in order to
communicate philosophical ideas. So logic.is like a foundation on which philosophical
debates take place. Without logic, it is very.hard to talk to others because in order for
a discussion to take place, there has to be.some ground, basic rules on which all philosophers
agree. So logic is a method of communication.for philosophical arguments. A good example
is Ludwig Wittgenstein who wanted to make.communication as precise as possible. Also
Bertrand Russell applied mathematics to philosophy..Reason and logic often go hand-in-hand. Since
logic is very rigid, like a computer or a.game of chess, some argue it limits humans’
ability to express things that go beyond logic,.like human emotions and passion. So reason
or rationality is somewhat more subjective.and less scientifically rigorous like logic.
So reason is often used to persuade people.while logic is outcome independent. In other
words if someone uses logic, the outcome might.not benefit the argument while reason is a
bit more selective, so people use reason to.support their argument. We often use rationalisation
as a negative form of reason used to persuade.people. Logic is more mathematical while reason
is more linguistic. .Rationalism vs empiricism: Rationalism is
a school of philosophy that believes we understand.the world based on our prior ability to reason.
It places human beings as a special creature.with the ability to know the world, so it
has its root in religions that places human.beings as an exception to the animal kingdom.
In other words, we are pre-assembled with.reason as a tool. A good example of a rationalist
is Rene Descartes who famously said I think,.therefore I am. In other words, the ability
to rationally think was enough to know our.existence. Leibniz  was another famous rationalist.
Empiricism, on the other hand, believes that.we know the world through experience. Our
thoughts come as a result of experience. We.know the property of fire because we experience
the heat. Babies have no fear of fire inside.them from birth. We experience the pain, therefore
we associate fire with pain. Empiricism is.more British while rationalism is more continental
European, mainly French and German. Famous.empiricists were John Lock and David Hume.
Empiricism is also close to pragmatism, mostly.associated with northern European cold climates,
which make you become more practical. Immanuel.Kant combined rationalism with empiricism
in his philosophy, saying that experience.is not enough to know the world. Our own mental
structure imposes categories to the world..In other word, we are not passive, just receiving
knowledge through experiences, but we actively.give the world a structure. He said we cannot
know the world as it is, but our knowledge.of the world is limited to the limit of the
human mental structure. Kant’s philosophy.also gave rise to phenomenology that studies
an object relative to our own experience,.not the object in of itself. Kant made a distinction
between phenomena, which is how we experience.the world and noumena, which is the world
in itself, which we can never know. I will.discuss this later. So for rationalists,
we know the world because we know while for.empiricists, we know the world because we
experience things..Political philosophy vs Ethics: Ethics is
a branch of philosophy that deals with morality,.justice and the legal system. Ethics is more
practical and pragmatic while political philosophy.deals with how societies decide what is right
and what is wrong and how to live peacefully.in a society and how we punish those who break
rules. As a society evolves, so does its morality,.so ethics change. Something that might be
morally acceptable a few centuries ago, is.not acceptable today. It also depends on the
culture. Some actions are morally right in.one culture, but not in another. Political
philosophy is the study of ethics and how.it changes..Egalitarianism vs elitism: One of the most
fundamental questions philosophy has grappled.over centuries is the idea of equality vs
quality. Egalitarian philosophy has its roots.in religions such as Christianity that all
humans have equal dignity and are equally.sacred. But egalitarianism as a philosophy
became prominent in Europe during the Enlightenment.period of the 18th and 19th centuries. Karl
Marx is perhaps the most famous egalitarian.philosopher who believed in a communist society
where all the resources were shared equally.among people. Elitism on the other hand believes
that we should run society based on meritocracy,.meaning not everyone gets a trophy. Some people
deserve certain rights and privileges because.they earned those things. Elitism has its
roots in nature, because the animal kingdom.runs on hierarchy which is part of the evolutionary
process. The most famous elitist philosopher.was Fredrick Nietzsche who incidentally lived
around the same time as Marx. For Nietzsche,.great artists and philosophers are not the
same as ordinary people, therefore should.not be treated so. Today, the biggest debate
in the west is these two schools of thought,.equality for all or privileges for those who
earned them. So egalitarian philosophy believes.in equality for all while elitist philosophy
believes in merits..Humanism vs utilitarianism: Humanism was born
in Europe during the Enlightenment in the.18th century, which replaced god with humans.
Instead of the divine being in charge of this.planet, we rational humans assumed the ownership
of this planet. Humanists believe in an egalitarian.world where all humans are equal, which is
rooted in religions, a belief that humans.are created equal. But in reality that is
not true. Not all humans are equal. Some are.more equal than others, as George Orwell famously
said in Animal Farm. So in philosophy the.big question is this: which humans should
determine our social, political and moral.values? Here comes utilitarianism, a branch
of humanism that believes in moral values.that benefit the greatest number of people.
Not all humans, but the largest majority of.humans. The word utility focuses on how something
benefits someone. Pre-enlightenment world.was dominated by kings and aristocrats while
the majority worked to benefit the minority..With its roots in Machiavelli’s philosophy
of end justifies the means, utilitarianism.turned this on its head, instead of the minority,
it focused on the majority. All actions should.be judged by their results that bring the
greatest happiness for the greatest number.of people. Utilitarianism was big in England
and the most famous one was Jeremy Bentham.and later Stuart Mill. Today’s democracy
is a little like utilitarian majority rule,.at least on paper. Humanism also gave birth
to other isms, such as socialism that divides.the world based on class, feminism that divides
the world based on gender and nationalism.that divides the world based on nationality
or ethnicity or language. So humanism puts.humans in charge of the planet and utilitarianism
says the majority of humans. . 
Postmodernism vs Existentialism: Existentialism.popularised after the philosophy of Nietzsche
argues that everything starts with our existence,.not god or some divine essence. There is no
divine spark, but we just develop a sense.of self during our life, nothing is given
to us prior to our birth. A famous existentialist.philosopher was Jean-Paul Sartre who said
that since we have no essence, we are responsible.to make something of ourselves. He famously
said that we are condemned to be free. While.existentialism is concerned with the individual,
Postmodernism popularised in France is more.concerned with communities or cultural groups.
Just like existentialism it is also rooted.in the philosophy of Nietzsche, specifically
in his criticism of a single truth within.the western philosophical tradition. While
existentialism focuses on the condition of.human existence, postmodernism focuses on
the idea of truth and social values. Western.philosophy believed in the single truth, like
the idea of a single god. So postmodernism.questioned European modernity as a project
to unify the whole world around European values.of individualism, freedom and materialism.
According to postmodernists all cultures are.as valid as European culture, therefore the
world doesn’t have to become like Europe.to be considered civilised. Postmodernism
is a reaction to modernity which includes.the Enlightenment humanism on the one hand,
but colonialism on the other. Postmodernists.put emphasis on power relations, how the weak
are forcefully pushed to one side. A famous.postmodernist, Michel Foucault, analysed how
the modern state develops effective tools.to control people, through the prison system,
surveillance, mass education and more. He.argued that even sexuality is a power-dynamics,
men oppressing women, which had a huge influence.on third-wave feminism that some argue has
become anti-men and anti-masculinity. Foucault.even said all knowledge is tied to power,
so there is no independent science, therefore.science and technology are tools for the powerful
to control the weak. .So to sum up, the core philosophy includes
ontology of existence, epistemology of knowledge.and everything else is a branch of these two.
Physics and metaphysics are part of ontology..Physics deals with matter while metaphysics
deals with non-material phenomena such as.ideas and consciousness. Reason, logic, rationalism
and empiricism are part of epistemology. Reason.is the tool to persuade others, therefore
more subjective, while logic is mathematical.and impartial. Rationalism says knowledge
comes from within while empiricism says knowledge.only comes from experience or outside. .So outside ontology and epistemology is the
philosophy of how to live. Political philosophy.studies morality of good and bad, equality
or meritocracy, majority mass or minority.elite. This is also tied to the meaning of
life. Existentialism puts emphasis on the.individual while postmodernism puts emphasis
on the group identity. .Next, I will look at the differences between
eastern and western philosophies, why one.focuses on physical science, while the other
on mental well-being. Which we should prioritise,.building rockets to conquer space or do yoga
for a more peaceful mind on earth..East vs West [Merchants vs Farmers] [Change
World vs Change self].In the 1930s, there was an interesting conversation
between the greatest Indian poet, philosopher.Tagore and the greatest German scientist,
Einstein. The conversation centred on the.idea of reality, truth and beauty. Einstein
believed in an objective reality outside the.human, while Tagore insisted on the subjective
interpretation of reality. To boil it down,.Einstein believed in the old theory of physics,
solid matter existing with or without humans.while Tagore was alluding to the mysterious
theory of quantum physics that our perception.or observation of matter is never really objective.
The conversation illustrated the difference.in eastern and western ways of thinking about
reality. One more pragmatic while the other.more spiritual. Now let’s look at a typical
hero in the east and west. .A western hero wants to change the world to
make it better for himself and those around.him while an eastern hero wants to change
himself. Western superheroes fight evil to.restore justice, peace, and correct the incorrect
while Asian heroes either accept their fate.or retreat to the forest for some contemplation.
Jesus, perhaps the greatest western hero,.confronted injustice and paid for it with
his own life, a sacrifice you can see in Harry.Potter as well. The Buddha, the founder of
Buddhism however, went to the forest to change.himself. Laozi, the founder of Taoism, retreated
to the mountains. In other words western philosophy.is about change while eastern philosophy is
more accepting your fate. A great example.of this in literature can be seen in the novels
of the Japanese British Nobel Prize-winning.author, Kazuo Ishiguro. His characters obey
their fate and rarely question their somewhat.unfair circumstances. However, a typical hero
in the west would rebel against their circumstance.to change the world. Accepting one’s fate
or putting up with an unfavourable environment.is seen as a sign of weakness in the west,
while those same traits are seen as signs.of strength in the east. By the east, my focus
is mainly old India, China and Japan. So a.western hero wants to change the world, while
an eastern hero wants to change himself to.adapt. .In today’s world, east and west have come
together a lot, because western mode of production.i.e. capitalism has taken over the world.
But if you look closer and a bit deeper, you.see a clear philosophical distinction. And
if you go back in time, the distinction appears.more clear. Why has eastern philosophy’s
main focus been on mental well-being, happiness.and spirituality, and community while western
philosophy’s main focus has been physical.well-being, rational science, technology,
materialism and individualism. Of course this.is a broad generalisation, as there are so
many philosophers on either side who are exceptions.to the rule, but generally speaking the main
distinction is spiritualism vs materialism.and community vs individualism. So in this
video I will look at some of the answers but.also give more detail about the differences
between eastern and western philosophy. Does.the climate, terrain and the soil have anything
to do with it? Are merchants more concerned.with materialism and farmers more with spirituality?.Geography terrain
Western philosophy as we know has its roots.in ancient Greece and later on in Rome. The
Greeks and the Romans were influenced by other.civilisations such the Egyptians and the Babylonians.
But there are very little or no written records.of an organised philosophy prior to the Greeks.
Eastern philosophy has its roots in the Indian.civilisation and the Chinese civilisation..If you look at their geographies, Greece is
made of some islands, between the Mediterranean.and the Black Sea. So large bodies of water
sandwiching the land areas. So if you want.to move around, all you need is a boat and
you could hop from island to island. This.allows a much smoother way to move things
around. There is less friction on water than.land. The Ancient Greeks heavily relied on
imported food due to its soil not being very.fertile. As a result, the Greeks relied on
trades which brought goods from Egypt, Mesopotamia,.Central Europe and more. But with this commodity
trade, also came ideas and knowledge, so the.region was a hub of cultural, scientific,
and technological exchange. This promoted.a more rational discourse which allowed the
Greeks to develop a more sophisticated science..For example Euclid’s Elements is the oldest
science book, which I’m sure was influenced.by the Egyptians, Babylonians and Phoenicians.
Pythagoras developed his mathematics. Aristotle.studied all kinds of things, including animals.
In fact the first Greek philosopher Thales.was an olive merchant himself who based his
philosophy on water being the most important.thing in the world. He famously predicted
that good weather i.e. lots of rain produced.lots of olive so he got very rich. So the
Greeks relied on trade, which allowed the.exchanges of ideas and practical sciences. .Indian and Chinese civilisations, however,
are more centred around rivers and mountains..In other words, quite different from ancient
Greece. India and China were blessed by its.many rivers that brought amazing soil from
the Himalayas so their agricultural economy.could sustain a huge population in big cities,
making China and India mostly self-sufficient..Trade with other peoples was a plus, but not
essential. China’s Yellow and Yangstee Rivers,.and Ancient India’s Indus and Ganges Rivers
all start in the snowy mountains of the Himalayas.and traverse for thousands of kilometers which
bring the fertile soil. It’s no surprise.that both India and China relied on a crop
that is incredibly water thirsty. Rice. It’s.also no surprise that Sadhguru, the greatest
Indian Guru in the world today has a simple.message: Save the soil. Because soil and farming
run really deep in eastern philosophy..So Greece’s geographical terrain allowed
trade to flourish between various peoples.and cultures. While ancient China and India
relied on their rivers to bring good soil.to them. The Greeks had to seek food from
somewhere else, while the Chinese and Indians.waited for their rivers to bring food to them.
As a result, from a survival point of view,.for the Greeks, merchants were the most important
class of people, while in the east the farmers.were the most important class of people. Since
merchants are mobile while farmers are stationary,.because you cannot carry around your land,
this allowed the Greeks to be more open-minded.to new ideas, new technology and new sciences.
Merchants are also less attached to their.ways, therefore easily follow the market or
commodity. Today you sell rice, tomorrow potato..Farmers, however, have a harder time to adapt,
and change quickly. So western philosophy.geared more towards pragmatic sciences while
eastern philosophy geared more towards spiritualism..If merchants don’t like something, they
change, but if farmers don’t get enough.water, they wait for the following season
or accept their fate. It’s harder to leave.your land and migrate. So western philosophy
is more change-oriented while eastern philosophy.is more fatalistic. In other words, you change
yourself..Climate to progress
Climate also plays a role. India and China.tend to be warmer throughout the year, so
it makes sense to be in the here and now,.which Buddhism teaches. Also seasons play
a predictable pattern every year and people.live a more cyclical life. Monsoon comes every
year. Rivers flood at a specific time of the.year. In a way, it was very similar to the
Egyptian way of life around the River Nile..Of course, when you rely on a river, you also
experience great famines, but they come every.few years or decades. The Greeks navigated
the seas where you’re for the most part.in control of where you’re going. Meanwhile
eastern civilisations were centred around.rivers. On rivers, your course is fixed, the
river takes you where the river takes you..As a result, eastern philosophy is more fatalistic.
The fate of humans, animals and plants are.in the hands of the same rivers. It meant
that they saw all living beings as part of.a big family, so they didn’t put humans
as being outsiders or special or above everybody.else. In Hinduism, Buddhism and Taoism, we
are not only from nature, we are nature, just.like other living beings. .The Greeks, however, experienced colder winters
so they had to source and accumulate food.for colder days. Since they relied on trade,
wars always disrupted the trade routes, which.meant you had to source your food from somewhere
else. Merchants relied on peacetime to continue.trade, but they also benefited from wars as
certain commodities were more sought-after..It’s the old adage, war fuels the economy
as money is moved around faster than peacetime..Since, things were pretty unpredictable, the
Greeks had to think long-term and prepare.not just for the cold winter, but for the
future, in case of warfare. Future became.the most important time, not here and now,
but next month, and next year. You couldn’t.afford to be in here and now like a zen Buddhist.
So this long-term or linear perception of.time became the dominant way of looking at
the world among the Greeks. A famous example.is Aristotle’s teleological philosophy that
everything has a purpose, usually a single.destination in the future..Original Sin to change the world
Western philosophy also through an exchange.with the middle-eastern religions like Judaism,
Christianity and later Islam, came to understand.that humans were separate from the animal
kingdom. We are kicked out of the Garden of.Eden, punished for our mistakes. As a result,
you try to compensate for your past mistakes..You want to correct the incorrect. What do
you do? You fight for causes. If you look.at literature, heroes are often people who
have sinned or made a terrible mistake. To.redeem themselves, they fight injustice. One
way to fight for justice is to make other.people’s lives better. Often materially.
You study the world, you invent new technology.to make life easier for others. .Eastern philosophers were not looking for
material comfort, but more for mental and.spiritual comfort. Buddha and Laozi left the
city in their spiritual quest and went to.the mountains and forests. Solitude allows
you to seek answers inside you, not on the.outside. Even today most buddhist temples
in India, Japan and China are located in the.mountains and forests, away from the crowd,
so people can get away from other people..The core doctrine of Buddhism is that material
comfort doesn’t make you happy in the long.run. .The Greeks, however, gathered in the city
to debate and dialogue like Socrates who would.walk around on the streets of Athens asking
people questions, while others established.schools like Plato’s Academy or Aristotle’s
Lyceum. Western philosophy relied on dialogue.and exchange like merchants do to flourish,
learn and improve. The west built universities,.churches, and schools in the middle of town
and villages so everyone could come, not like.some remote temple that nobody could go to..In eastern philosophy, you don’t force your
will on nature to control or change it, but.try to flow with nature. Since both Indian
and Chinese civilisations were centred around.rivers, often river flow is seen as nature’s
way, in which you don’t resist or remove.obstacles in your way but move around those
obstacles. In other words, you change yourself,.not the outside world. A good example is,
in India traffic moves around an obstacle,.be it a cow or an accident. While in the west,
a small accident on the road brings everything.to a halt. So eastern philosophy tells you
to be more fluid and flexible like yoga and.less rigid..But western philosophy relies on manipulating
nature through science and technology to make.life easier for humans. As a result, we live
in a very comfortable period in history. Millions.of people couldn’t survive to adulthood,
but today child morality is at its lowest.in history. People live longer, healthier.
But this also has negative consequences for.other species on earth as the more comfortable
we are, the harder it becomes for some other.species in some areas. .conquer: world vs self
Asians are on average physically smaller than.Europeans, perhaps due to genetic mutation
or sexual selection or possibly due to eating.less protein as farmers rely on rice which
is a staple diet in most of Asia. How to cope.with poor diet? Martial arts in China and
yoga in India were used to strengthen and.discipline the body. Eastern philosophy is
centred on the body as a vehicle to get to.a higher place and this also means eastern
philosophy is more about avoiding conflict.rather than confronting others. Taoism, Buddhism
and Hinduism promote non-violence. Vegetarianism,.although trendy in the west today, has been
practiced in the east for thousands of years..Jainism is an Indian religion that promotes
a strict vegetarian diet and Gandhi, a pacifist.himself, admired Jainism for that. .Unlike Asians, The Greeks ate a lot of bread,
which is four times more protein-rich than.rice. Since the Greek states were constantly
fighting against one another, as well as the.Persians, they developed the olympic games
which was to train soldiers for wars. It’s.no surprise that it was the Greeks who made
it all the way to India through Alexander.the Great. While we have no records of invading
armies from India and China going to Persia.or the Middle East. It was the nomadic Mongols
who made it to Europe, not the more sophisticated.civilisations like the Chinese and Indians.
In fact the Chinese built walls to shield.themselves from the Mongols. And India was
ravaged by a series of invasions by the Greeks,.the Persians, the Muslims, the Mongols and
even the British. Why?.Eastern philosophy is less centred on conquering
the world, but conquering yourself. For example,.Buddhism is centered on the inner conflict
of fighting or resisting your desires. If.you focus on your inner conflict, you’re
less likely to engage in external physical.conflicts such as tribal, or ideological.
In Hindu yogi teaching, your soul is the real.you, while your physical body is acquired
through food you put in your mouth. Not just.that, you also acquire your ego or the sense
of self through impressions and experiences.with others. So your soul is permanent and
your body and ego are temporary, fleeting.and acquired. Now Einstein vs Tagore conversation
on the nature of reality makes sense. Einstein.sees an external world while Tagore sees everything
internal. In other words, yogi philosophy.is based on the pursuit of becoming one with
the universe. Quantum physics has a similar.theory that as soon as you observe something,
you change it. In other words, we are not.separate from the world or universe, we are
with the universe. The world is not outside.us, but we are the universe, it is inside
us. So Yoga is one way to tap into or get.closer to your universal soul by taming your
body and ego and desires. The idea is to let.your soul control you, not your body control
your soul..Eastern philosophy is based on negation of
the self, while western philosophy is firmly.rooted in the idea of individual self. As
a result of this, the east tends to be more.communitarian where the individual is less
important than the community or the universe.while the west tends to be more individualistic.
Buddhism’s core philosophy is to remove.the self to ease suffering. Wanting or desiring
is seen as negative because you’re feeding.the ego. .The Greeks were more of a merchant's mentality
to grow more profit and become wealthier and.wealthier. Merchants are more focused on material
success and less concerned with the spiritual.side of life. As a result, it was the Greeks
who developed a more rational and scientific.method to understand the material world. This
scientific method allowed objectivity which.meant that a Greek scholar could disagree
with their mentors. Even thinkers like Plato.openly disagreed with their teacher Socrates,
and Aristotle questioned Plato. In the east,.however, openly questioning your teacher was
and still is a form of disrespect. Instead.of finding flaws in those older than you,
you’re supposed to respect them. This is.especially important in Confucianism. Sensei
is someone you do not challenge. .Good vs Evil
Western philosophy makes a distinction between.good and evil as almost separate entities
and separate individuals or even groups. Often.in warfare, the enemy is seen as evil to motivate
your soldiers to die in defence of good. This.is true on both sides. So once you assign
goodness with one way of seeing the world,.the opposite of that is naturally bad or even
evil. This battle of good against evil allows.progress. Those victorious can claim goodness.
In the east, however, both good and bad are.seen as more psychological and less ideological
so good and bad are one or two sides of the.same coin. The Ying and yang in Taoism means
every person has dark and light, good and.evil built in them. Good and evil coexist,
so no matter how much a society progresses,.it doesn’t change the core ying-yang existence.
We as humans are neither good nor bad, but.a bit of both. Our job is to understand this
so we keep a good balance between the two.forces. .I think the most fundamental difference between
eastern and western philosophy is the idea.of linear progress in the west versus a cyclical
notion in the east, especially in Indian philosophy..The Greeks believed in progress. Socrates
developed his questioning method of getting.to the objective truth. Plato introduced the
idea of perfection. And Aristotle came up.with telos for purpose. So getting to Socratic
truth, Platonic perfection and Aristotelian.telos or purpose gave birth a western progressive
philosophy and science. So instead of focusing.too much on the spiritual side of life, the
west focused on making the physical life easier.by deploying a scientific method to understand
the world and invent technologies that made.life easier. As a result, today most people
live a comfortable life thanks to western.civilization. People live longer thanks to
western medicine and technology. When survival.is no longer an issue, people seek meaning
and purpose. So eastern philosophy plays a.major role in bringing inner peace for millions
of people in the east as well as in the west.who seek meaning beyond material comfort. .So to sum up, climate, terrain and food impacted
how the east and west prioritized philosophical.understanding of the world. The Greeks relied
on merchants and trade so the priority went.to practical sciences and rationality. While
in the east farming allowed big cities to.flourish and people lived longer. As a result,
philosophers were seeking happiness not physical.comfort. Life expectancy also grew in the
east which allowed more reflection in old.age. When young, people seek success but in
old age, people search for meaning. .Next, I will discuss the Greek trio of Socrates,
Plato and Aristotle, by looking at their similarities.and differences. .Socrates vs Plato vs Aristotle [The Rational
Path].In 399 BCE, the Greek democracy condemned
one of the greatest philosophers to death.for spreading bad ideas among the youth. Today,
he is considered the father of western philosophy.and possibly the father of western civilisation.
His tragic death sparked a new human philosophy.that was based on rational thinking, not religious
dogma. Who was this man? It was of course,.Mr Socrates. Well, he lost his life, but rationality
triumphed. He paid the price with his own.life..It’s no surprise or exaggeration to tell
you that western philosophy originated in.Greece, mainly in the city of Athens. Previously
I talked about the differences between eastern.and western philosophies due to different
terrains, food production, cultural exchanges.and so on that gave rise to spiritualism in
the east while rationalism in the west. Eastern.philosophy, centred on farming and rivers,
became fatalistic while the Greeks, centred.on trade and the seas, became rationalistic.
So here, I will talk about three of the most.famous forefathers of western rational philosophy:
Socrates, Plato and Aristotle. .Pre-Socratic philosophy
Before I talk about the big three, let me.mention a few who came before. The first known
Greek philosopher was Thales of Miletus who.said that everything is made of water. Today
we know that 60% of the human body and 70%.of our brain are made of water, so he was
right. He also used reason to predict how.the weather affected olive harvest and made
a lot of money as a result. People at the.time believed a good or bad harvest was in
the hands of god. So Thales understood that.it had nothing to do with it, but just good
weather. So western philosophy, from the very.earliest time, emphasised rationality to understand
and manipulate nature to benefit humans and.he was a businessman. Another notable philosopher
was Pythagoras, famous for his theorem, a2+b2=c2..He argued that the world is run by mathematical
rules which can be understood through numbers. .Even musical harmony is ruled by geometrical
rules. So Pythagoras based his ideas on mathematical.logic, which is a step deeper and more rigid
than rationality. Another logical philosopher.was Parmenides (515-445 BCE) who also used
logical thinking and reasoning to prove that.human experiences give us a false perception
of the world and often contradicts with logical.thinking. So these early Greek philosophers
paved the way for rationality to become the.method of thinking. .Socrates:
If you have to name one person as the founder.of Western philosophy, one name stands tall
above everyone. It’s of course Mr Socrates,.not the football legend from Brazil but an
ancient Greek dude who lived between 469 and.399 BCE. He was the true father of western
philosophy, because he developed a robust.philosophical method to understand the meaning
of life and to expose dogmas. Unlike everyone.else, he did not accept things at face value.
His questioning or dialectical method of examining.everything through a series of questions to
get to the bottom of things or finding the.truth became the basis of modern scientific
method. To understand something, you have.to ask questions, like what, where, when,
why and how. Once you go through all the questions,.the answer you get tends to be the best answer
out there. Today science does the same thing..Scientific theories are tested through a series
of experiments. .Socrates also questioned the purpose of life
itself. For him, the purpose of human life.was to be virtuous. How can you be virtuous?
Again, you have to examine your life critically..You cannot sit in your comfortable chair and
live in ignorance. Uncomfortable truths are.better than comforting lies. He famously said,
the unexamined life is not wroth living. In.other words, ignorance wasn’t bliss but
just stupid and unworthy. .This had a massive psychological shift in
how people saw the world and themselves. You.couldn’t just rely on gods or even the priests,
you had the ability to rationally question.things to get to the truth for yourself. The
Athenian democracy saw him as a threat in.awakening the youth, so they forced him to
sip hemlock poison which killed him in 399.BCE making him a true martyr of philosophy.
Socrates was a street philosopher who walked.around the streets of Athens to question people
and have a dialogue about life and philosophy..He was like a modern-day provocateur or a
whistleblower and authorities don’t like.that. .Socrates’s philosophical legacy was to make
truth the most important aim of philosophy..Philosophy wasn’t to tell you comforting
lies but it was to challenge you into discomfort..In western philosophy, Socrates, narrowed
its scope into one single truth, which is.the basis of modern science today, searching
for the ultimate theory that explains everything..Quote: “There is only one good, knowledge,
and one evil, ignorance.” This single truth.became the cornerstone of western philosophy
for almost 2500 years, until the German Nietzsche.questioned it, paving the way for postmodernism
that believed in multiples truths. .Socrates didn’t leave any written records
because he was busy on the streets, challenging.strangers about their truths. I wonder if
he was around today, how would he challenge.people about my truth and your truth? First,
people would think he’s crazy and second,.he would go mad with everyone having their
own truths. .Plato
After the death of Socrates, the torch was.passed to one his students, who also wrote
his teachers’ philosophical ideas down..Plato, who lived between 427 and 347 BCE,
having witnessed his teacher executed by the.democratic mobs was an idealist arguing that
we all have a perfect idea of something, but.in reality this doesn’t exist. It only exists
in our mind as a perfect form of that thing..There are chairs we see inside a room, but
these are just models of a perfect chair that.only exists in our mind. In other words, the
chairs that humans make are modeled on the.perfect chair inside the human mind. We see
a mere shadow of what reality is on the outside. .His famous thought experiment, “Allegory
of the Cave” illustrates that if you face.away from the light source and see your own
shadow inside a cave, that’s how we perceive.reality, not what it is but its shadow through
our senses. So for Plato, humans come preassembled.with all knowledge. In other words, we don’t
learn through experiences or senses but it’s.all inside. It only comes out when we experience
it. Quote: “What we call learning is only.a process of recollection.” This makes Plato’s
philosophy somewhat counter-intuitive. We.think what’s on the outside is the real
thing and what we have on the inside, in our.mind, is a mere representation of that real
object. Plato thinks the opposite. What we.see on the outside is the shadow of what’s
in our mind. We have an innate knowledge of.the world from birth and what we learn is
just remembering or recalling those things.that are already stored inside us. This is
very similar to how the rationalists saw knowledge,.which I will discuss later on. .Plato’s idea of knowledge coming from inside
us can also be interpreted in terms of the.subconscious and Jungian collective subconscious,
deeply embedded in us from our evolutionary.past. For instance the fear of snake in us
is not because we experience snake bites in.our own life, but because our ancestors experienced
it in the Savanah, in the trees, in the jungle.or in a cave. Despite us living in beautiful,
safe houses, we still have the inner experience.of being in a dark cave. Another example is
horror movies. Our desire to see horror movies.is simply because we still want to experience
the fear from time to time, because that fear.is inside us, and horror movies simply stimulate
that fear. Sigmund Freud’s dream interpretation.is another way to understand Plato. In other
words, dreams are our little window into the.subconscious world inside us. Fiction writers,
artists, musicians often experience a trance-like.state when they’re immersed in their art,
tapping into their subconscious to bring out.an art that is appreciated by many people,
simply because they reach a deeper well inside.to drink from the collective subconscious
knowledge. Despite being the artistic uncle,.Plato also had strong opinion about politics..Plato was a republican and saw democracy akin
to a mob rule as it killed his teacher, Socrates,.so he argued that philosophers were better-suited
to rule a society as a republic. Just like.Nietzsche, he had a low opinion of the general
public as unsuitable to rule a society, while.philosophers were better-equipped to rule
a society. So he set up his academy where.he wanted to cultivate the best minds of his
generation, the elites of the society. Today’s.university is very much modelled on Plato’s
academy where the intellectuals lock horns.to discuss ideas and one of those people was
Aristotle who graduated from his academy..Plato is called an idealist philosopher, however
his student, Aristotle went a different route.towards practical knowledge. .So to sum up, Plato’s teacher, Mr Socrates,
questioned things to find the truth. Plato.said the truth or perfection only exists in
the soul, in the mind or in the world of ideas.or forms, and only their shadows are perceived
through our senses. So Socrates gave philosophy.a method of finding the truth, while Plato
offered a perfectionist vision of the truth,.inside the mind. Now these two come together
in Aristotle to provide a basis for modern.western philosophy, a progressive perfectionist
vision of seeking truth. A single truth. .Aristotle
While Plato sat inside a cave, saying that.to find the truth, reasoning was superior
to real world observation, his student, Aristotle,.however, reversed this by getting his hands
dirty in dissecting frogs and gazing at the.stars to understand the real world. Aristotle
who lived between 384 and 322 BCE argued that.truth is not inside of us, but it’s on the
outside in the real world. Truth in other.words is in the world around us. His method
was evidence-based research, akin to modern.science. He actually went to the fields to
study animals and sea creatures. .He questioned Plato’s ideal form, saying
that if a man is a model of an ideal form,.who is the ideal form model of? It’s the
same argument, if god created us, who created.god and who created the god who created god,
which goes to infinity. .Aristotle put human senses to work and argued
that our observation of things is the best.way to find the truth. He said everything
in the world can be categorised by their substance,.quantity, place, time and so forth. Today
modern science classifies animals into species,.earth into continents and oceans, rocks and
minerals. This categorisation helps humans.to gain knowledge much faster and more effectively.
He famously said humans are rational animals..Aristotle also said that everything has a
purpose or telos or an end goal. The purpose.of this video is to educate people about philosophy.
As a result, Aristotle’s telos has become.a branch of philosophy called teleology that
looks at things through their purpose, not.their essence. So when we look at a chair,
we don’t think of wood and trees and forests,.but we think of sitting on it. A chair is
to be sat on, not considered a piece of tree..So Aristotle’s telos put purpose before
essence. As a result western philosophy is.a very purpose-driven way of thinking, which
emphasises something’s utility or use before.its essence. As a result western cultures
value solution to problems, efficiency and.pragmatism that make things better..Today, modern science develops useful technology,
so it’s heavily utility-based. We like useful.things. The purpose of science is to develop
technology to make life easier. What’s the.purpose of human civilization? To reach perfection,
which is a kind of Aristotelian teleology..So Aristotle’s telos coincided with the
Christian view that we’re heading towards.an apocalypse or heaven, a perfectionist utopia
where you’re happy, and blissful. In science,.we’re heading towards a perfect understanding
of the universe and life. So telos allows.us to make plans, have goals and strive towards
something. Without an end goal it is hard.to motivate ourselves to do things. .Just like Plato, he also set up a school,
called Lyceum, where he gathered the best.minds of his generation to study. One of his
most famous students was a man who took his.teleological teaching to conquer the world.
It was, of course, Alexander the Great who.made it all the way to India in his attempt
to conquer the world. .I should point out an important Greek philosopher
who lived outside the rationality-dominated.school. It was Epicurus whose philosophy centred
on happiness, not rationality or truth so.instead of an academy or school, he set up
a hippy-style Garden where he gathered his.friends to talk philosophy while enjoying
life in peace and tranquility. Epicurus understood.that the biggest enemy of happiness is also
the main reason humans invented philosophy..What is it? The fear of death. The entire
foundation of human philosophy rests on this.mystery. Epicurus had a very clever answer.
He said the fear of death is irrational. It.makes no sense. Why? For the simple reason
that we do not know death. Not only that we.cannot know death. Because nobody has returned
from death to tell us what it is. Death is.just one way street. Now that we know the
fact that we do not and cannot know death,.why fear it? We are afraid of lions because
we know they can eat us. We are are afraid.of fire because we know the pain. But we cannot
and will not know death, it’s totally irrational.to be afraid of it. Instead of worrying about
death, we should make the most of this life.by living in and spreading peace and happiness
among others. Later his philosophy was adapted.into utilitarianism to maximise happiness
for the majority of people. But despite philosophy.of happiness, Epicurus remains an outsider
in western philosophy. .So to sum up, Socrates questioned people on
the streets of Athens to critically examine.things in life, Plato sat inside a cave, not
literally though, and asked himself about.the ideal form that may have come from god
or the human mind, while Aristotle went to.the field and got his hands dirty to understand
the natural world. Socrates placed virtue.in knowledge, and rational truth, while rejecting
passion, emotions or faith as dogmatic. This.was Nietzsche’s biggest problem with western
philosophy, which he squarely blamed on Socrates..Too much rationality ignores human passion
and heavily relies on reason which is rigid,.inflexible that turns us into machines. Plato,
however, retreated to himself and argued that.perfection doesn’t exist on the outside
but only on the inside, in our head. The world.is a terrible place, precisely because it
is a skewed model of a perfect form that only.exists in our mind. Plato’s ideas were closer
to a religious idea of god, so later Christians.and Muslims interpreted Plato’s perfect
form as god. God is perfect while humans and.the world are imperfect images of god. Aristotle
said forget about the imperfect world, someone.has to go to the fields to study the bloody
nature through observation and dissection,.so his method was empirical science, which
became the basis of medieval Islamic science.and later the 16th century European science. .Next, I will talk about the three horses of
Eastern philosophy, the Buddha, Lao Tzu and.Confucius..Buddha vs Laozi vs Confucius [Nature’s Way]
Previously I discussed the Greek trio of Socrates,.Plato and Aristotle who influenced western
philosophy, the three most famous eastern.philosophers were Lao Tzu, the founder of
Taoism, the Buddha, the founder of Buddhism,.and Confucius, the founder of Confucianism.
I will mainly focus on their philosophies.and less on these religious practices which
are quite different in different countries..Eastern philosophical tradition is very rich
and complex, so these three philosophers can.help us shed lights on eastern spirituality. .Laozi
Lao Tzu or Laozi lived in 6th century BCE.in China and is said to be the author of Tao
Te Ching or Dao de Jing, which is the foundational.text of Taoism, a philosophy that traces its
origin to shamanism and hermeticism. Taoism.which is also sometimes called Daoism literally
means the way or the enlightened path or nature’s.way which is spontaneous, eternal, unnameable
and undefinable. Quote: “Nature does not.hurry, yet everything is accomplished.”
It’s simply the flow of the universe, such.as gravity allowing rivers to flow downward,
without any effort..The core idea of Taoism is the doctrine of
wu-wei which can be translated as non-resistance.or action through inaction. Wei means purposeful
and intentional while wu means there is no,.or lacking. So literally it means there is
no purposeful act. A good metaphor for humans.to live their lives by is the river, which
the Chinese civilisations relied on. Rivers.flow downward, if hindered by a rock, instead
of moving the rock, they flow around it. This.means we should live our lives in alignment
or harmoniously with nature, not against nature. .Another important idea of Taoism is ying and
yang or good and evil, which live together.inside everyone so we all have the dark and
light. You cannot separate the two. I think.this fundamentally differs from a western
religion in which good and evil are thought.to be separate entities. However, according
to Taoism, they are two sides of the same.coin. Everything is neither completely negative
nor positive, but both. In other words, a.saint has his sins and a sinner has his redeeming
qualities. In Taoism, humans are one manifestation.of the Tao or the way, you could say just
one species among millions of other species. .Lao Tzu emphasised not to follow one’s desire,
goals or ambitions but rather find your natural.flow. Ziran, which literally means naturally,
is a Taoist value which emphasises natural.creativity and spontaneity. As a result Taoism
is seen as the religion of the artists who.live a more intuitive and spontaneous life
that mimics nature’s flow. You could even.make a connection with Carl Jung’s psychology
of the collective subconscious—deeply embedded.memories of our species, or those species
before—that artists tap into by finding.the flow of nature. .This artistic flow is much more elaborated
in another book titled the Zhuangzi, supposedly.authored by another important figure in Taoism,
a man called Zhuangzi. The book has many humorous.stories, allegories, and anecdotes, with the
most famous one being the Butterfly Dream,.in which Zhuang Zhuo wakes up one morning
from a dream in which he had turned into a.butterfly. Now he is perplexed and asks this
mind-blowing question: Was he dreaming of.a butterfly or a butterfly dreaming Zhuang
Zhuo? The answer is not important here, but.the question itself is the main point. We
humans seek clear answers or clarity, but.nature doesn’t care about separate entities
or separation of different species. Nature.is one big, perpetual flow. From nature’s
perspective, a human and a butterfly are simply.two different manifestations of the same thing.
Even the state of being awake and dreaming.are false distinctions or dichotomy, because
they’re one and the same thing. For example.artists, novelists, musicians often dream
or daydream their best works because they.find the flow of nature’s collective subconsciousness. .Laozi is said to have lived during the Zhuo
Dynasty whose capital was close to the Yellow.River, therefore the river is often used as
a metaphor for Taoism. Later in Life Laozi.is said to have traveled west where he wrote
Dao De Jing in some remote mountains, and.then vanished into thin air, also a great
metaphor in how to flow in life like a wind.and river. Today Laozi’s ideas are extremely
important but also deeply embedded into the.cultures of China, Korea and Japan. To give
you an example, people in Japan tend to be.less confrontational, tend to avoid conflict
which fits in with the Taoist idea of non-resistance. .So to sum up, Laozi or Taoism philosophy centres
on the idea of not going against the natural.flow, but flowing with it. Not resisting nature's
way, but going with it..Buddha
Siddartha Gautama or the Buddha (563-483 BCE).lived a luxurious life in a rich Northern
Indian family, but he wasn’t happy. He learnt.that suffering was universal among the poor
and rich, young and old, and men and women..But why do we suffer?.The reason we suffer is because of our desires
for pleasure. The more we get the more we.want. If we have a big house, next time we
will not be fulfilled if we don't get an even.bigger house, bigger cars, more partners,
more wealth, friends, subscribers and followers..At no point, we can satisfactorily say, it
is enough. A good example is addiction. If.a small dose makes you high today, but you
need a larger dose to give you the same high.a month later or a year later. In other words,
as you experience more, your desires also.grow bigger. So life is just an endless cycle
of desire, fulfillment of that desire and.more desires. How to solve this problem? .To ease suffering, according to Buddhism we
should nip our wants in the bud by detaching.ourselves from our desires for worldly possessions.
Don’t chase things and be happy in the moment..But it is easier said than done. Everyone
says it is a good idea to be content with.what you have right now. But curbing your
desires is not an easy job. Why is it so hard? .Here is when Buddhism gets really interesting
and profoundly deep. We all think, we are.who we are. We have a sense of the self we
call me and you. We think it is a somewhat.solid entity. In western religions, this self
is imparted to us from god. It’s real. This.individual self is genuine and for the most
part unchangeable. According to Buddhism,.however, you’re wrong. Why? The self or
ego is not real. It’s just an illusion or.a mirage or a temporary imposter attached
to our body, you could say like a parasite.it lives on us. What does it do inside us?
This imposter self fuels our desires, ambitions,.and goals. In other words, it uses us to go
out in the world and achieve things but at.the end of the day we still don’t feel fulfilled.
Especially when we achieve everything and.death hits us, we lose our shit because we
went to so much trouble acquiring our wealth,.fame, power and now death is snatching it
all away from us. It’s a bad deal. So what.is the solution, Mr Buddha?.His answer might shock you. According to Buddha,
to be truly enlightened and blissful or to.achieve the nirvana stage, which means we
must kill the imposter self. This thing we.call the self or ego is the source of all
of our desires. To not desire anything, we.must remove the self. According to Buddhism,
our soul is the real thing, and also very.much universal while the self is a kind of
picture we put in our head every time we are.born in our various reincarnations. One way
to understand this is perhaps through Mr Plato.who also said that the idea of things is the
perfect form, and the real thing on the outside.is a mere shadow of the real thing. In Buddhism,
your soul is genuine, eternal and universal.while your body and ego are temporary and
fleeting. We are not separate from the universe,.but a tiny part of a big whole. To become
happy and one with the universe, you must.detach yourself from your desires, and kill
the self, through meditations, solitude and.rigorous physical and mental discipline. Quote:
“A disciplined mind brings happiness.” .This is very similar to Schopenhauer’s philosophy
of the blind universal will which is a force.beyond our control yet it rules most of what
we do in life. There is a disagreement whether.Schopenhauer reached the same conclusion independent
of Buddhism and Hinduism or he was influenced.by these Indian philosophies. I will discuss
Schopenhauer’s philosophy in more detail.later on. So according to Buddhism to be truly
enlightened is to not see yourself as a separate.self, but part of a bigger whole, part of
a conscious universe. So true inner peace.comes not from outside, for example by achieving
your goals, but from inside once you become.enlightened. .Buddha’s teachings through various forms
of Buddhism are incredibly important in most.of East Asia. Buddhism has also become one
of the most influential philosophies in the.west too as it emphasizes individual inner
journey rather than collective prayers in.a church. .So to sum up, Buddha as a rich, powerful prince
but wasn’t fulfilled in life and realised.that all humans suffer because of our desires.
To ease suffering, we should detach ourselves.from our desires and to be truly blissful,
we should eliminate the self or ego through.meditation and mental discipline. .Confucius 
While both Laozi and the Buddha escaped society.for some solitude and inner peace, Confucius
(551-479 BCE) however, tried to solve the.practical socio-political questions like how
we can live politically and socially together.in peace and harmony or how to organise society
in way that is peaceful. So his philosophy.is less individualistic but more concerned
about the collective existence, especially.in big cities and countries. .To find a great solution for socio-political
coexistence, Confucius looked at how nature.organizes things, especially in the animal
kingdom. One of the biggest problems, and.the main source of wars and violence in a
human society is when there is confusion as.to who stands where. Who gets what? Who owns
what? Who is responsible for what? He understood.that the best method was the natural hierarchy
or a pyramid social system. Without an established.system of hierarchy and authority, there is
chaos and confusion. And hierarchy allows.everyone to know their place, so there is
no confusion or conflict as to which chair.belongs to who. Removing social confusion
was Confucius’s main task (pun intended).Now, not only everyone knows their own place,
they also know other people’s places too..So instead of a police watching everyone or
patrolling the whole society, now everyone.can watch each other. If someone sits in the
wrong chair, other people can tell him that.it is not his seat. So if everyone knows their
place, everyone can watch everyone so nobody.dares to disrupt the social harmony. So kings
at the top of the pyramid and everyone else.take their place based on their ranks and
age just like in a game of chess, perhaps.the most logical game humans have invented.
Confucius also realised that everything starts.in the family, because it is the first line
of defence against chaos. A solid family structure.means a solid foundation for a society. Inside
the family, the man is at the top, then wife,.then sons and then daughters. .One of the most common criticisms against
Confucius is the possibility of tyranny. Those.in positions of power can abuse it. Confucius
also emphasised responsibility and duty. Those.at the top are responsible to protect those
below them. A king is responsible to keep.people safe and a man in the family is responsible
to protect and provide for his wife and children..Those below, in return, are loyal and follow
their superiors and do as asked. To understand.Confucianism, you should look things not just
from an individual point of view, but from.a collective perspective. For example, if
your body parts didn’t function in alignment.with the rest of your body, you are sick and
needs treatment. Society is the same. If one.or few members push things in the opposite
direction, there is violence, which is a social.illness..You might think it is pretty outdated, but
you would be surprised that this Confucian.hierarchy is a pretty efficient system which
is at work in modern companies, because we.hear this cliche that no work is done by a
committee, which is true in most situations..Most corporate structure follows a strict
and rigid hierarchy and a chain of command..In the animal kingdom, a hierarchy is often
achieved through violence, but Confucius says,.since it is natural we might as well adopt
it to reduce violence. Of course, in the modern.age, revolutions are a common occurrence.
Those at the bottom, rebel against the establishment..That’s why Confucius emphasised duty and
responsibility. When a ruler becomes tyrannical,.he fails his duty. It all comes down to respecting
your role in society. Quote: ”Without feelings.of respect, what is there to distinguish men
from beasts?”.Today, China, Korea and Japan have adopted
these Confucian methods in sorting out social.situations where seniority and juniority plays
a major role in schools, universities and.companies. Loyalty and respect are significant
in Confucianism, but also meritocracy. As.a result, traditionally China had a strict
civil service examination for centuries and.only the very bright and intelligent were
recruited for high military and government.jobs. .In the 20th century, however, Mao, the egalitarian
socialist, tried to dismantle the Confucian.class hierarchy through the Cultural Revolution
that caused great pain for a lot of people..But of course, the Chinese Communist Party
replaced the old class-based Confucian hierarchy.with a political hierarchy. Many economists
attribute China’s rapid economic development.to this efficient hierarchical system as China
was run like a company, the president being.the CEO of China. Things get done quickly,
but of course it also comes at a cost of many.voices being suppressed. Traditionally the
Chinese Communist Party used to distance itself.from the archaic Confucius philosophy, because
it contradicts the egalitarian philosophy.of socialism in which everyone is equal and
there is no hierarchy, at least on paper..But in reality, every human society has been
hierarchical. Even today, China is slowly.moving towards a more Confucian philosophy.
As China’s developing, not only it is utilising.a Confucian hierarchy for its efficiency,
but also in cultivating a more robust culture.of meritocracy and traditional masculinity
which were central to Confucian philosophy. .Conclusion
To sum up, Laozi’s teaching is not to resist.or destroy, or go against nature, but to flow
with nature. As a result, he says we should.be more intuitive and spontaneous. In other
words, humans are of nature, so it’s time.we forgot our humanness and live in the flow
of nature. .The Buddha taught that suffering is universal
because of our goals, desires and ambitions..To find true peace is to look inside, not
to outside material success. And to be truly.happy is to kill your ego or the self that
has ambition and desires. .Confucius tackled the socio-political question
of how to live a peaceful coexistence through.a hierarchical system in which everyone knows
their place and position in society. .While the Greeks were questioning truth, authority,
poking holes at the natural world to understand.its property, those in the east were seeking
a harmonious life with nature, not only with.other humans but with all creatures on earth.
The Greeks disagreed with each other, while.the Asians tried to find agreement, consensus
not only among humans, but also between humans.and the natural world. .The fact these three figures founded a religion
of their own, while the three Greeks did not,.shows a fundamental difference between eastern
and western philosophy. In the east, societies.are generally more group-centred while in
the west it is more individual-centred. But.if you really think about it, the philosophies
of these three eastern thinkers, is highly.individualised. They put the emphasis on the
individual to take charge of themselves. Don’t.change the world, change yourself. So while
eastern social fabric is communitarian, the.philosophies are individualistic as they put
demand on the individual to take responsibility.for changing themselves so they adapt to the
society they live in. Don’t change others.but yourself. Don’t change nature but yourself. The
Greeks, however, focused on how to change.nature as quickly, efficiently as possible..So in the west, individuality is static, god-given
or born while social fabric is dynamic. In.other words, in western philosophy the individual
is solid and society and nature malleable,.and changeable. In the east, however, nature
as well as society’s fabrics are static.while the individual is changeable. In other
words, do not attempt to change others or.nature because it is easier to change yourself.
If you cannot fit in with others, take a good.look at yourself and find what’s wrong with
you. People in the east are less likely to.complain about the world, instead try to adapt
to the world. Before you complain that I’m.generalising too much, sit back and relax
or look at yourself in the mirror. Don’t.worry, I am kidding..Next, I will discuss two distinct approaches
to philosophy: animalism that sees humans.as animals therefore needed to be herded to
bring order, and humanism that sees all humans.as equal to one another. In other words, elitism
vs egalitarianism or carnivorous vs herbivorous.philosophies. .Humanism vs Animalism (Egalitarianism vs Elitism)
Previously I discussed eastern philosophy.versus western philosophy, and how one employed
rationality to tame nature while the other.employed spirituality to tame the individual.
Today I will look at two core social philosophical.schools: humanism vs animalism. Humanism is
a belief that humans are somewhat special,.either created by god or not, therefore the
purpose of any society is to protect all humans.equally. Humanism is also called egalitarianism
with a few babies of its own like socialism,.feminism, liberalism and postmodernism..Elitism, or animalism on the other hand is
a belief that some humans are more equal than.others, especially the rulers, kings and elite
class of people or the talented people as.in meritocracy. This is because hierarchy
is very much part of the animal kingdom, the.strongest wins the race. But as human civilisation
has progressed and we have become more efficient.in taming nature, the historical trend is
moving towards a more egalitarian human society..So here is the most important question, was
Karl Marx right that the future is communism?.But first let me explain the history of these
two divergent philosophical approaches and.introduce some of the most important philosophers
on each side..Humanism has its roots in religions. In the
west, Christianity, and Judaism at its core.believed in all humans being equal in the
eye of god. Augustine of Hippo (354-430 CE).believed all humans have free will to choose
between good and evil. He also said that one.should love everyone equality. Quote: “The
measure of love is to love without measure.”.Thomas Aquinas (1225-74), another Christian
philosopher, argued that God created the world.and all humans were equal, especially in freedom.
Quote: “By nature all men are equal in liberty,.but not in other endowments.” .Outside the religious tradition, the first
true humanist might be Mozi who lived in 4th.century BC in China. He advocated a kind of
universal humanism. At the time Confucianism.was the dominant philosophy in China in which
society was divided based on ranks and hierarchies,.so Mozi believed in universal reciprocation.
Quote: “Universal love is really the way.of the sage-kings. It is what gives peace
to the rulers and sustenance to the people.”.This is an early form of humanism. Another
early figure was the 6th century Persian philosopher.Mazdak who promoted economic equality among
all people. He even protested against the.rich having many wives while the poor having
no wife. His idea became quite influential.in the Persian empire, but soon fizzled out. .On the opposite of humanism we have a school
of elitist philosophy we can term as realism.as it is called in politics. The basic idea
of realism is that humans are chaotic and.erratic animals that need to be tamed, controlled
and ruled, not through honesty or fairness.but through deception or brute force. .One of the earliest realist philosophers was
Sun Tzu who lived in China between 544-496.BCE. In his famous book, the Art of War, employs
nature’s tactics, such as camouflage, deception.and even submission to survive or dominate
others, especially in wars. His philosophy.was to win at all costs, so to speak. For
him, life is not about fairness or equality,.it was about winning which is at the heart
of evolutionary biology. You only survive.or thrive if you win nature’s battles and
overcome hurdles. .Some of his strategies in the Art of War are
socially counter-intuitive like he says you.must appear small when you’re big and appear
big when you’re small in order to deceive.your enemy. In Sun Tzu’s Art of War honesty
is the worst policy. Quote: “When the enemy.is relaxed, make them toil. When full, starve
them. When settled, make them move.” In.other words, stand tall when you’re small
and sit small when you’re tall. These are.some basic survival tactics in the wild, for
example in the battle between the carnivores.and herbivores, a gazelle jumps higher to
show its health so the cheetahs don’t bother.chasing them. Some of the tactics are also
to throw off your enemy like when negotiating,.ask for less when you want more, which is
still in use in corporate capitalism. The.Art of War’s basic rules are to know yourself,
your enemy, your environment, time your attack.and truce, while at the same time make sure
your enemy knows nothing truthful about you..Be a peacock when small and be a mouse when
big. So this is the earliest form of political.deception in order to prolong your rule over
others. The winners are those who lie the.best. .So Sun Tzu borrowed his philosophy from the
animal kingdom where there is no morality,.only winners. .Machiavelli who lived between 1469 and 1527,
was an Italian thinker who is famous for his.book The Prince in which he advises the rulers
to use any methods available to them to achieve.their goal of maximising their power and domination
over other humans. In other words, the famous.line that the end justifies the means, which
goes contrary to the humanist and religious.morality of protecting life. Quote: “It
is better to be feared than loved, if you.cannot be both.” He argued that a ruler
must be like a savage lion when needed and.a cunning fox when needed. So brute force
combined with cunning deception are needed.in order to rule over society. Why? Because
humans are savages and they’re waiting for.your weakest moment to strike and take away
your power like Hamlet’s uncle in Shakespeare’s.play Hamlet. Machiavelli lived a few centuries
before Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural.selection, but he still understood the savage
nature of human politics. In other words,.morality is for the weak, and power and deception
are for the strong. Quote: “He who wishes.to be obeyed must know how to command.”
In order to prevent a rebellion, a ruler must.show terror and fear for its subject to behave
well. Those at the top of society have the.most to lose, so they can use any means available
to make sure they keep their power and wealth..They use the police, the legal system and
whatever else so nobody can take those things.away from them. .So, just like Sun Tzu, Machiavelli, based
his philosophy on the animal kingdom. It’s.not about equality or fairness, but it’s
about winning and conquering. .Thomas Hobbes was an English philosopher who
lived between 1588 and 1679. In his book Leviathan,.he argued that humans are savages and only
a civilised state can protect humans from.each other. In other words, humans have established
states to escape the brutality of nature..According to him, humans are physical machines
in nature but when entering society they give.up their savage tendencies and power to live
peacefully. Quote: "Life in the state of nature.is solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short.”
The fear of violence is always there. To escape.it, humans have made a contract with their
governing rulers, in return for their obedience.and freedom, the state provides them with
peace, justice, protection for them and their.property. Just like Machiavelli, Hobbes believed
in the use of force to tame people. Quote:.“Not believing in force is the same as not
believing in gravitation.” Despite his argument.for a civilised state, he understood that
humans were in essence savage animals. .So Sun Tzu drew on the animal kingdom saying
deception was better than honesty. Machiavelli.went even further saying that deception combined
with brute force are justified to tame humans..Hobbes argued a civilised state has every
right to tame the unruly humans.  .Now let’s look at a few philosophers who
opposed this animalistic philosophy based.on the natural world. These philosophers saw
human life as somewhat sacred. .Voltaire who lived between 1694 and 1777 was
a French philosopher who believed in a kind.of universal individual liberty, not tyranny
as Machiavelli suggested. Unlike Machiavelli’s.iron rule, he believed in open scepticism
and freedom of expression for all, so anyone.could criticise or even rebel against the
dominant traditions and dogmas. Quote: “Men.are equal; it is not birth but virtue that
makes the difference.” In other words, he.didn’t support the idea that the rulers
and kings had a birthright authority over.truth or liberty. The Church or the state
should not hold absolute power. Instead everyone,.despite their socio-economic status, deserves
the right to have an education and access.to knowledge. Today, liberal democracies in
the west follow the principles of free speech.and individual autonomy, ideas that were promoted
by Voltaire, so he is often considered the.father of liberal individualism, because he
believed everyone irrespective of their socio-economic.class deserved to be equally free. So nature
works with hierarchy but Voltaire argued that.every human deserves equal freedom to express
themselves.  .Jean-Jacque Rousseau who lived between 1712-1778
was born in Geneva. Unlike Hobbes who said.man is born savage but tamed in society, Rousseau
believed that humans are naturally good, but.they are contaminated or tainted in society
to act terrible. He famously said: “Man.is born free, yet he is everywhere in chains.”
This was especially true in big cities where.people turned selfish. He believed in the
country people were naturally nicer, friendlier.and fairer, but once people migrated to the
cities instead of becoming more civilised,.ironically they turned into selfish animals. .Unlike Hobbes’s top down approach, Rousseau
believed in a bottom-up approach arguing that.the masses should be able to run the state,
not some select individuals like kings and.generals. His famous book, the Social Contract
is said to have influenced the French Revolution.in 1789, in which the anti-monarchy revolutionaries
toppled the king and France became a republic..Of course it didn’t last very long, but
it sowed the seed of freedom, equality and.brotherhood which resulted in three major
ideologies of socialism, liberalism and nationalism.which have dominated politics for centuries
ever since. So Rousseau’s egalitarian approach.had a huge influence in political history. .So to sum up, the humanists argue that since
life is too short, let’s all be more equal,.fairer and nicer to each other. Mozi argued
for an equal universal education, Rousseau.for equal political participation and Voltaire
for equal freedom for everyone to express.themselves. Political animists or elitists
on the other hand, argue that since life’s.too short, it is all about winning, conquering
and dominating others, so they didn’t trust.all humans therefore promoted a more robust
political regime that didn’t allow people.to be free to challenge the ruler or the state.
Sun Tzu used deception, Machiavelli justified.repression and Hobbes promoted state as a
tool to control human savages. .As a historical trend, we are moving towards
an egalitarian humanist future, at least in.principle. Also this was Karl Marx’s prediction
that slowly we are heading towards a communist.utopia. In reality however, all human societies
are highly unequal and hierarchical, and it’s.unlikely that this will change for the foreseeable
future. Humanism invented by humans while.elitism or animalism invented by nature and
evolutionary biology. We are all born unequal.in beauty, talent, intellect, and physical
strength, which contribute to societies being.dominated by those who are naturally blessed,
either with talent or beauty. But despite.nature not being helpful in producing us equally,
there is a deep desire among humans for equality,.fairness and justice. You could say that human
kind is called kind for a reason..As human civilization has improved, and the
more we have tamed nature we have become more.confident that a humanist utopia is possible
so in recent centuries egalitarian philosophy.has become more dominant, which a few centuries
ago must have been unthinkable. Socialist.experiments showed the failure of egalitarianism
in Russia, but the idea is still pretty strong.in the world. So who knows, in the future,
humans might produce human babies in labs.who are identical in all attributes to create
a truly egalitarian utopia. Once you produce.baby outside the natural process, equality
is a lot easier to achieve. Identical babies.produce identical adults. A Brave New World
kind of world. But will we be happy?.Next, I will discuss the battle between pursuing
knowledge and pursuing happiness. In other.words, those who pursue knowledge to gain
power and those who pursue happiness and peace.to live a simpler life..Knowledge vs Happiness: What’s the Purpose
of Life? [Power vs Peace].Previously I discussed the two philosophical
approaches to organising society, egalitarian.humanism versus hierarchical elitism. Here,
I will discuss a fundamental question about.the meaning of life. Are we here to know the
world or be happy? Are we here to seek knowledge.or happiness? So in this segment, I will look
at a few important philosophers. On the knowledge.side, I will look at the philosophy of Francis
Bacon, Martin Heidegger and Michel Foucault..On the happiness side, I will look at the
philosophy of Erasmus, Michel Montaigne and.Bertrand Russell. .As I discussed earlier, philosophy is concerned
mainly with two questions: ontology asks what.is out there and epistemology asks how we
know it, so knowledge is fundamental to philosophy..You could say we humans are hard-wired to
see, understand, analyse and interpret the.world. In other words, we are curious creatures
so the development of modern science is just.a byproduct of this curiosity and our thirst
for knowledge drives innovation and social.change..But we are also creatures who seek happiness.
While knowledge can empower us, it doesn’t.make us happy. While knowledge can transform
our lives, it doesn’t guarantee happiness.or peace of mind. .As I discussed earlier, the first philosopher
to methodically seek the truth was Socrates.and later Aristotle improved it by giving
the approach a scientific and empirical tinge.to it. But it wasn’t until centuries later
that the scientific approach was perfected.in Europe, mainly in 15th and 16th centuries
through the works of scientists such as Copernicus,.Galileo and Newton. .During this period, the English philosopher,
scientist and politician, Francis Bacon who.lived between 1561 and 1626, looked at knowledge
from an empirical point of view. He graduated.from the University of Cambridge, and he’s
often considered the first empiricist, a school.of philosophy later developed by other British
philosophers such as John Locke and David.Hume. Bacon placed the source of knowledge
in our experience through our senses. At the.time, the Church held the view that knowledge
came from God but science was challenging.that. Church relied on people not knowing,
and not questioning things. When nobody knows.things, the church could control information
and become the source of knowledge. Today,.you could say the big media companies have
the same mindset. .But Bacon understood the power of knowledge
and wanted to educate everyone because he.believed that through knowledge you could
empower the poor so they could better their.lives. This is an early idea of public education,
which today we take for granted. Bacon understood.that humans are on the one hand knowledge
seekers, but on the other hand, humans also.have some blindspots like religious belief,
tribal affiliations, and love of money which.prevent us from getting to the truth. Another
problem we have as humans is that we project.our own limited experience to the world. Bacon
argued that science, however, doesn’t look.at an individual but looks at the majority
to generalise. It’s through generalisation.that you get closer to the truth. For instance,
if one person experiences something, it is.subjective and unreliable but if 10, 20,100
or more people experience the same thing,.then you can generalise and make science out
of it. Understanding generality is an immense.power, according to Francis Bacon. So knowledge
not only opens the knower’s mind, it also.empowers them to change their lives for the
better. Of course, Bacon lived at a time,.when people had very little so education and
knowledge could transform a person’s life.immeasurably..Desiderius Erasmus who lived between 1466
and 1536 was a Dutch philosopher who wrote.a very influential book called In Praise of
Folly. Unlike Francis Bacon, Erasmus argued.to be happy, naivety and ignorance are more
important than knowing. For him the purpose.of life is not to gain power but to be content.
He was writing at the time when Europe was.waking up to have a Renaissance, a resurgence
in scientific and rational pursuit, which.went against the teachings of the church to
have faith in god. Erasmus a Christian himself,.while criticizing the corruption in the Catholic
church, argued that to be happy, a little.faith and ignorance were vitally important.
His philosophy was taken up by fiction writers.such as Cervantes, the author of Don Quixote
and later the Russian writer, Fyodor Dostoevsky..The goal of life is not to know everything
but to lead a simple life. Knowledge or power.doesn’t make you happy but simplicity and
folly do. It’s the old adage that ignorance.is bliss, which goes completely counter to
the age of the Enlightenment and rationality..So Erasmus said that being an idiot was the
surest way to be happy. .Michel de Montaigne who lived between 1533
and 1592 was a French philosopher who had.a very curious childhood. Although born into
a wealthy family, he spent his first three.years of childhood in the house of a peasant
so he could learn the life of the poor. This.must have had a profound influence on him
later on in life. If Erasmus said folly was.a good medicine for happiness, Montaigne argued
that to be happy one should live a simple.life. Instead of seeking the company of many
people, one should try to live a more solitary.life, because society can corrupt you, either
morally or intellectually. .In today’s social media world of chasing
likes and online attention and validation,.his message resonates with a lot of people.
We always try to seek the validation of our.peers like some addictive drug, to an extent
that we are never satisfied. Montaigne says,.to have a peaceful life, don’t chase other
people’s approval or glory or fame which.makes us pretentious and fake most of the
time. He argued that attention seekers are.not original thinkers, but rather suffers
from herd mentality or tribalism which in.the heat of the crowd or moment turns us into
mobs, we commit horrendous crimes and only.later realise how stupid it was. To prevent
becoming a mob, Montaigne argued that once.you disentangle yourself from the group, crowd,
or mobs, you develop a clarity of mind or.an inner tranquility. It’s not only good
for your happiness, but also good for intellectual.and moral integrity, because solitude allows
you to develop yourself. To have a lasting.name, writers and artists should not be bogged
down to today’s politics and tribalism..Montaigne’s idea of solitude also inspired
Nietzsche who was extremely critical of the.masses or mobs or tribal thinking. I will
discuss Nietzsche later on..As modernity made mass education the norm,
and the crowded cities habitat for the majority.of people, life’s meaning became even more
acute for the modern man. Knowledge of the.world wasn’t enough to have a meaningful
life, we needed something else. .Martin Heidegger who lived between 1889 and
1976, was a German philosopher who turned.the lens onto himself. Francis Bacon, like
Aristotle, was interested in knowing the outside.world, but Heidegger, like Diogenes of Sinope,
wanted to know the human being itself. In.his famous book Being and Time, instead of
asking what human being is, he asked how it.is like to be human. What’s that experience
like? Why? The simple answer is that we are.scientists who happen to be also the subject
of science. When you study animals, we are.outsiders, but when you study human beings,
we are insiders. .Heidegger didn’t want to have an abstract
answer, instead he wanted to know to have.a concrete answer to the question of being,
which is incidentally the root of the word.ontology in Greek. So what’s his answer?
Heidegger measured life as a finite phenomena,.starting at birth and ending in death. Just
a line that has a beginning and an end. Now,.unlike other animals, we know death. We even
anticipate it. The knowledge of death makes.us anxious and fearful so to cope we tend
to not think about it on a daily basis. It’s.either a coping mechanism or simply we do
not have time to think about it every day.as we are busy with work and life. So we are
the being who is aware of death but we also.try not to think about it. .That’s precisely Heidegger’s answer. Human
beings or beings are to be aware of death..Instead of making us anxious or depressed,
he thinks it empowers us. This knowledge of.death gives our life authenticity and meaning.
So if Bacon said knowledge of the world empowers.us to better our life physically, Heidegger
says, the knowledge of death gives our life.meaning and empowers us to live fully and
authentically. .Bertrand Russell who lived between 1872 and
1970 was a British philosopher who was deeply.steeped in the logical and mathematical side
of philosophy, just like Ludwig Wittgenstein.whom he influenced. He used a logical and
rational approach, to argue that to be happy,.one should work less. You could say, he is
responding to Marx who argued that workers.are exploited by the rich. But he is also
responding to the northern European work ethics,.which states that work is morally good in
itself, therefore this morality, according.to some, was responsible for modern capitalism.
Russell, however, argued that seeing work.as a morally good thing was not only irrational,
but also made a few people very rich while.the majority very unhappy. Why? Because not
all kinds of work are the same. Some are good.and some are not good. Some are meaningful
and some are not. To bundle all as a good.thing is not logical. He concluded that working
less increases human happiness. So instead.of working yourself to death, you should enjoy
life more. Do other activities. Today, a lot.of people are so busy working long hours that
they lose sight of their well-being and happiness..This is especially true for men, because we
are more drawn to numbers just like Bertrand.Russell was. We watch growth graphs and become
obsessed with it. We work one day and then.extrapolate that to a week, a month and then
a year. So if we work this many days, we will.have this much money and as a result we lose
sight of the fact that life is meant to be.lived, not worked to death. So Russell argued
that to be happy, work less. He lived to be.90 years old. .Michel Foucault who lived between 1926 and
1984 was a French philosopher. Unlike Bacon.and Heidegger, he saw knowledge as a cynical
tool of repression. Foucault looked at modernity.through the lens of Nietzsche, saying that
modern rationality wasn’t liberating humans.but creating a more robust chain to control
us. He famously studied the prison system,.in how prisons are designed to control us,
either directly through imprisonment or indirectly.through the fear of it. He argued that those
who have access to science and knowledge use.it to discipline the rest of us through the
education system as well as the legal system. .Foucault argued that knowledge is a tool.
Science is a tool. Rationality is a tool..But mostly for the powerful elite because
they have access to all of them, while the.majority of us are mere subjects. Foucault
was also inspired by Kant whose epistemological.revolution argued that our knowledge of reality
is not totally objective, but rather we see.the world the way we see because we impose
our own mental structure on the world. Foucault.even argued that man or mankind itself is
a recent invention. .So to sum up, on the knowledge side, Francis
Bacon understood that our knowledge of the.world could empower us to better our lives.
Heidegger argued that our knowledge of death.can give our life more meaning and authenticity.
Foucault, however, said everything is invented,.there is nothing solid to understand. Knowledge
is just a tool for power to manipulate nature.and other humans. .So to sum up, on the happiness side, Erasmus
argued that folly, ignorance or naivety is.a good thing to have to lead a happier life.
We have all seen children. As we grow older,.we lose that naivety and become a bit more
miserable. Montaigne argued that don’t follow.the crowd, instead seek some solitude to cultivate
your own inner peace. Don’t seek validation.from others like a drug addict. The higher
you go, the more you seek to get high and.higher. No mountain is high enough. So listen
to Montaigne because he came down the mountain.to settle in a hut. Even his name means Montaigne,
so climb yourself and your ego, not other.people’s validation. Bertrand Russell argued
that work is not a morally good or bad thing,.so we should prioritize happiness over work.
Work to live or live to work. I should really.listen to this. But I want to have more subscribers.
Montaigne, help! .So knowledge can make your physical life better
or make you more successful financially or.boost your social standing, but it might decrease
your overall happiness. Knowing things also.makes us humans very cynical about the world,
just like Foucault said that all knowledge.is power and all authorities want to suppress
you. Naivety, on the other hand, might make.your physical life harder, as you don’t
have everything figured out, but it can also.lead you to a more long-lasting happiness
as you trust other people and rely on other.people, which brings a level of sincerity
in yourself and those around you. So knowledge.makes you successful but it could also cynical,
while ignorance hinders your success, it could.lead to a more blissful life. What do you
think?.Next, I will discuss the battle between rationalists
and empiricists leading to Immanuel Kant’s.great breakthrough in philosophical knowledge..Rationalists vs empiricists vs Kant (How we
know reality).Previously I discussed the question whether
our life purpose is to seek knowledge or seek.happiness. In this segment I will look at
one of the biggest battles in philosophy between.the rationalists, mostly mainland Europeans
who argue that knowledge is somewhat innate.inside us, and the empiricists, mainly British
who argue that knowledge comes from experience..Immanuel Kant brought the two together. If
western philosophy was a two sided funnel,.Kant would be the narrow part, so everything
before him is squeezed through him and after.him, Hegel and Schopenhauer moved philosophy
in two directions. Hegel went historical and.rational, while Schopenhauer went psychological
and subconscious. I will discuss these two.philosophical approaches later on..Rationalism is a school of philosophy that
relies on human reason to understand the world..Reason itself is an innate human property.
In other words, we are born with the ability.to reason and early rationalists saw reason
as a god-given gift. .The father of rationalism is Rene Descartes
who lived between 1596 and 1650. He was a.French philosopher and scientist who famously
did his thought experiment. He sat down in.his armchair and asked the simple question,
what if everything we know is just a dream..Nothing exists in reality.  In other words,
to prove that he existed, he did the opposite,.he doubted his own existence. Then he said
even if everything was a dream, the dreamer.has to be real, otherwise there will be no
dreaming without a dreamer or doubt without.a doubter so he said the most famous line
in philosophy, “I think, therefore I am.”.Even if you doubt your own existence, this
doubt is real. .According to Descartes we get knowledge or
ideas in three different ways: some come from.our experiences, some derived from reason,
and some ideas are innate inside us, presumably.from god. So rationalists like Rene Descartes
argue that we have an innate knowledge of.the world and as we grow, we simply unfold
that knowledge to see things more clearly..In a way rationalists are like Plato in saying
that our knowledge of the world inside us.and learning is just recollection of that
innate knowledge. So the seed is inside us,.not outside..The other famous rationalist was Gottfried
Leibniz who lived between 1646 and 1716. Today.we know him more because of the famous argument
he had with Issac Newton over the invention.of Calculus. Leibniz, however, was also a
great philosopher who made a distinction between.rational truth and factual truth. In other
words, our knowledge of the world relies on.our innate reason but also on human experience.
The things we experience on the outside builds.on and solidifies our inner knowledge..For Leibniz, the human mind is a small representation
of the entire universe. In other words, the.human mind contains everything in the universe.
If the universe is rational, then the human.mind is a representation of that rationality.
However, he conceded that human rationality.is not always adequate to understand the world
so we need human experiences to complement.our rational faculties. One of the biggest
problems for Leibniz was his belief in god,.so he attempted to reconcile scientific empiricism
with the idea of god who knows it all. In.doing so, Leibniz argued for two different
forms of truths. The empirical truths we gain.through experiences add to our rational truths
which we innately have or god-given..So to sum up, rationalists argue that humans
are naturally equipped to utilize reason to.understand the world, with or without the
need of observation or animal senses. In other.words, we don’t need experiences to know
the world. We simply know it, because for.the most part god has imparted us with innate
knowledge or ability of reasoning. .Empiricists, however, disagreed, saying we
understand the world, not innately, but through.experience and empirical data we gather from
the world through our human senses. Our mind.is a blank slate without experience. .John Locke who lived between 1632 and 1704,
around the same time as Leibniz, was a pioneer.of empiricism who said that everything we
know about the world has come to us from our.experience. He gave the example of new-born
babies to show that we humans have not a single.idea from birth. We simply learn by observing
and experiencing things. Quote: “If we attentively.consider newborn children, we shall have little
reason to think that they bring many ideas.into the world with them.” Locke understood
that while we may not have innate ideas from.birth, we do have the ability to learn a language
which may be innate. This was later developed.by Noam Chomsky in his famous theory of universal
grammar that humans are hardwired to learn.a language and its structure. So John Locke
concluded that all knowledge we gain, we gain.through experience. .David Hume who lived between 1711 and 76 built
on the John Locke’s idea of empirical experience.as a source of knowledge and further argued
that not only we understand the world through.observation and experiences, but we are also
be able to categorize things as a kind customary.habit which guide us through life. Hume argues
that if you see a tree, then another, then.another, and at some point you see a pattern
or category. This you call trees. We have.no notion of trees from birth. We are like
blank slates as babies and only through encounters.with the outside world, we begin to form knowledge
of the outside world. The same with night.and day. As you see the cycle being repeated,
you begin to expect it as a kind of custom.that night turns into day and day turns into
night and the cycle becomes a customary knowledge..This over time becomes ideas and beliefs.
Over time they turn into what the rationalists.call innate knowledge. Hume says they are
nothing but old impressions and perceptions.over time. As knowledge is passed on from
generation to generation, it may seem innate,.which is nothing but someone’s experience.
So David Hume, added custom as a kind of repeated.experience or common knowledge and argued
that we learn things from experience and it.is not innate. .So the rationalists believed we humans are
equipped with some innate knowledge of the.world at birth, while the empiricists argued
that we are blank slates and only through.our experiences we gain knowledge of the world.
In other words, rationalists see knowledge.flow from inside-out like a torch shedding
light on the outside, while the empiricists.see knowledge flow from outside like a window
lighting a room. .Here comes the German giant, Immanuel Kant
who lived between 1724 and 1804.  Kant took.up the challenge of reconciling these two
divergent schools of philosophy. To solve.the problem between the rationalists and the
empiricists, Kant devised a new theory that.divided the world into two: phenomena and
noumena. Phenomena is the world of experiences,.how we understand the world through our bodily
senses. Things we see, hear, touch and smell.and observe and study. Noumena, on the other
hand, is the world in itself, which we can.never truly know. For example we can touch
and study a rock, but we cannot truly understand.what it feels to be a rock. As a result our
knowledge of the rock is not complete, it.is limited and partial..Kant argued that when we’re receiving information
through experience, however, we are not passive.receivers, instead we humans also impose our
own structures to the world. We categorize.things into rocks, trees, animals and whatnot.
The world we see is a reflection of the mental.structure we put out to the world. Rocks and
trees may not have any notion of being such,.but humans have imposed such categories onto
them. In other words, we are not passive knowledge.receivers but actively imposing our own structure
on things. .Now Kant brings the rationalists and empiricists
together. Rationalists argue everything is.inside us, while empiricists say everything
is outside us, and Kant says we are sort of.on the threshold of outside and inside. 
Like a kind of window glass, in the middle.of inside and outside. Our inner mental structure
shapes how we experience the world. For example,.a good analogy would be fishing. To catch
a fish, a fisherman throws a net. If the holes.in your net are too large, the fish escape,
and if the net has no hole, it catches more.water than fish. So the fish is the outside
world while the net we throw is our mental.structure we put out to capture the experience
as knowledge. .We humans probe the world through our innate
mental structure which catches the outside.experience-based knowledge. So for Kant reason
and experience go hand in hand in understanding.the world. Without the net, you cannot catch.
You need both reason and experience to understand.the world. This he called his Copernican Revolution.
Why? Because in the middle ages, people believed.the sun was orbiting the earth, and Copernicus
said the earth is orbiting the sun. Kant did.the same. Empiricists say knowledge comes
from outside, and Kant says yes, but not only.we actively seek the outside knowledge, but
it also goes through us so our mental structure.determines reality on the outside. In other
words, our human method puts a structure to.the world that would not exist without humans.
And this structure makes it easy for us to.understand and manipulate the world. Imagine
we are not human, we might have a very different.understanding of the world. .So to sum up, the rationalists think reason
is more important than experience in our pursuit.of knowledge. Our reason is like a torch that
allows us to see things. The empiricists,.however, counter-argue that experience is
primary and reason is secondary. Our senses.act like a window that lets light in so we
understand things. Kant says we humans are.both a torch and a window because our mental
structure allows us to experience and understand.the world better, faster and more effectively.
Without a good method or an effective tool.and structure, our experiences are all over
the place. .The debate is still not over though. Despite
Kant uniting the two epistemological approaches.in philosophy, there are still people who
think one way or another. Our modern science.is leaning more to the empiricists' camp while
most psychologists lean more towards not the.rationalist but the irrational subconscious
or the unconscious in determining how we understand.the world. So the debate has shifted from
reason to passion and in some cases to intuition..It’s not rationality but intuition that
allows us to understand the world. .Next, I will discuss what motivates human
action by looking at two of Kant’s famous.successors, who went in very different directions.
Schopenhauer went psychologically towards.eastern philosophy while Hegel built his philosophy
on history. On the one hand we have Hegel,.Marx, Sartre and others who explained human
motivation through history and rationality,.while on the other hand, Schopenhauer, Kierkegaard
and Nietzsche relied on the individual psyche .and human passion to explain human motivation. .Sociological Philosophy: Hegel vs Marx vs
Sartre vs Zizek [Reason Motivates Us).Previously I discussed how Immanuel Kant bridged
the two philosophical approaches to epistemology,.rationalism and empiricism. So in western
philosophy Kant is like a funnel. He influenced.another two branches of philosophy that came
after him, which tried to answer some fundamental.questions like, what makes us who we are?
What motivates our actions? Hegel’s answer.was history and rationality while his arch-rival
Schopenhauer’s answer was the subconscious.will. Hegel’s philosophy went the sociological
route, basing human action on history and.rationality while Schopenhauer’s philosophy
went the psychological route, basing human.motivation on the subconscious blind will
or human passion. .In this segment, I will look at sociology
and rationality by discussing philosophers,.including Hegel, Marx, Sartre, and Zizek who
argue that we are the product of history..But they didn’t stop there. Since history
makes us who we are, it is also our job to.make history. So we are not only moulded and
shaped by the historical era in which we live.in, but also through our own life choices.
So social philosophy is built on the philosophy.of progressive egalitarianism stating that
we are heading towards a perfectionist utopia.on the one hand, and materialism stating that
the most important aspect of human life is.the material success, on the other. Of course,
not all of them agreed on this. .It’s important to note that philosophers
who came after Kant were in a sense responding.to Kant, because his breakthrough in bringing
the rationalists and the empiricists together.was a huge moment in philosophy. .Georg Hegel who lived between 1770 and 1831,
too, responded to Kant. Hegel had two problems.with Kant. First, Kant argued that we humans
only understand the phenomena but we have.no access to noumena or the thing in itself.
We can touch a rock but we cannot fully understand.it. For Hegel this noumena world, which we
can never fully know, looked like an empty.abstraction, pure speculation based on Kant’s
own assumption. In other words, he just made.it up by claiming that such a thing existed
in the first place. .Hegel’s second problem with Kant was that
he argued that our innate structures or catheterisation.by which we interpret the world is fixed.
In other words, we use a fish net, or a framework.by which we catch a fish or experience, but
the net or the framework is always fixed and.nobody can change it. For the history buff
Hegel everything, including human consciousness,.was subject to change through time. History
has shown us that humans evolve, so do our.tools including the fish net or our ability
to reason. In other words, everything has.a history. Even a rock has a history. It changes
through time. And humans are very much the.product of the historical era. .How do we change? Hegel says through dialectic
processes. When two opposites collide it makes.a third thing that has a bit of both the original
things but it is also slightly different characters. .Hegel says every phenomenon or idea or thesis
as he called it contains a contradiction within.itself, which he called antithesis, and this
conflict which is resolved in synthesis, or.a newer idea which is an improvement on or
different from the thesis and antithesis..Like a child has characteristics of both parents
but also different from both. This historical.process continues in generating new thesis
and antithesis which lead to further synthesis.and the history continues. So according to
Hegel, Kant was wrong in saying that human.mental structure or reason does not change.
For Hegel everything is subject to change..It’s important to note that Kant was a lot
firmer in his religious belief than Hegel,.which explains that Kant sees reason as static
while Hegel sees it as malleable and changeable.through time. Another reason is of course,
the French Revolution as well as the rise.of Napoleon, which for the very first time
in human history, ordinary people took power.from the king, and anyone could become Napoleon.
So nothing was fixed. Kant, being a much older.man, was fiercely against any kind of revolution
that could destabilize the status quo. .For Hegel the world has a history and we are
for the most part the product of a historical.era. In other words, reality is a historical
process, not constant. However, since we are.the product of history, we can also affect
the course of history through ideas that capture.the spirit of an age. For example, Napoleon
managed to influence history as he captured.the spirit of 19th century Europe, people
didn’t believe in the absolute power of.kings so demanded change. Hegel can be characterised
as a perfectionist rationalist, believing.that history is moving towards perfection.
Now, Hegel only interpreted history, his student.wanted to change history. .Karl Marx who lived between 1818 and 83 learnt
a great deal from Hegel. He came to the conclusion.that if we are the product of history, our
history must be the product of those who came.before us. Marx had a problem. Hegel was good
at interpreting history, even at recognising.the people who were capable of changing, but
Marx was more concerned about changing things.for the good, especially for the disadvantaged
majority who were the real force behind economic.production. Marx said the history of our existence
has been nothing but a continuous class struggle.between the haves and have-nots, the powerful
and the powerless, with the powerful enjoying.it all and the powerless having a tough time
of it. So Marx developed a philosophy of rational.materialism, arguing that material inequality
was the root of all evils. He argued that.humans are fundamentally motivated by material
objects so we are rational because we want.material things. To solve this inequality,
he adopted egalitarianism. For Marx the perfectionist.future utopia was an egalitarian society where
you only worked for the hours that provided.you enough subsistence and the rest of time
you could relax on the beach..You can also see traces of Christianity in
Marxism, the fight between good and evil culminating.in the weak overthrowing the powerful and
turning the world into a utopian communist.heaven where everyone lives equally and happily
ever after. But Marx was not religious so.he based his philosophy on rational materialism
in which all workers unite to overthrow the.exploitative class and everyone lives in harmony
and peace and nobody starves. For Marx, not.only communism was desirable, it was also
historically inevitable because for him history.was moving towards perfection, through incremental
improvement or dialectical change as Hegel.said. For example feudalism was an improvement
on hunter-gatherer societies, Capitalism was.an improvement on feudalism, socialism an
improvement on capitalism, and finally communism.an improvement on socialism. And for Marx,
communism was the final phase of human history..You couldn’t make it any better. Just like
heaven, you cannot create a heaven that’s.better than another heaven. Or maybe you could,
but generally heavens tend to mean perfection. If.they do exist of course..Marx’s class-based analysis had deep communitarian
roots or group-based, as a result it failed.in a highly individualised Europe, despite
many attempts. For example in the 1870s Paris.had a socialist revolution but it didn’t
stick. Marxism found fertile soil in countries.with a strong communitarian bond, like Russia
and China, so the 20th century witnessed many.Marxist revolutions to move  history in the
right direction. These attempts had partial.success, but ultimately failed to create a
communist utopia. .So Hegel talked about history in motion, Marx
talked about how to speed up that historical.motion. Both Hegel and Marx saw things from
a society’s perspective. Now I will discuss.how this history-based philosophy applies
to a person’s own individual history, from.birth to death. If a society has a history,
so does an individual. .Jean-Paul Sartre who lived between 1905 and
1980 was a French existentialist philosopher..He was not a Marxist but was hugely influenced
by Marx and other Marxists, especially the.Maoist movement in France. Hegel and Marx
both agreed that humans are not only the products.of history, but we humans also serve the purpose
of history. Hegel explained reality through.a god-like spirit or idea, and Marx explained
through historical materialism and class struggle..In other words, both argued that we individuals
are here to serve a grander mission or purpose,.be it god or history or class struggle or
general society. .But what’s the purpose of individual human
life? Sartre’s existentialist philosophy.argued that human life has no purpose because
we are made neither by god, nor by the blind.force of history as Marx and Hegel outlined,
instead we are made by our own history, choices.we make in our own life. In other words, we
have no essence or purpose from birth, we.simply acquire it though our life, often through
our own free choices and actions. Since we.have no pre-ordained purpose set for us by
some other power, like god or society, we.are free to make mistakes to find our own
purpose. .Sartre goes even further by saying that we
are condemned to be free and condemned to.make mistakes but this freedom comes with
… you guessed it as uncle Ben said, it comes.with responsibility. In other words, we are
our own makers, we craft our own self identity,.therefore we have to live with what we make
of ourselves. Unlike Hegel and Marx, Sartre.liberates individuals from the constraints
of god, history, traditions, class and even.human nature. So today, a new trend among
homo sapiens is transgenderism, the idea that.you can define your own gender identity based
on your own feelings. People feel they are.in the wrong body and they change their gender
in an attempt to correct the incorrect. This.might have been difficult in the pre-existentialist
era, but now it is widely accepted in most.of the developed world that you can decide
what your identity is. Instead of your biology,.society’s history, tradition or norms defining
you, you have the full control to make yourself.and find your own life’s purpose. As I said,
with this freedom, comes responsibility. If.you make mistakes, you have to own those mistakes.
Don’t blame others. In other words, if you.build a bridge and it collapses, you’re
responsible. In the same way, you build your.own identity and if something goes wrong,
you cannot blame others for it. So Jean-Paul.Sartre’s existentialist philosophy gave
the individual the full autonomy to make something.of themselves. For him it wasn’t social
history, but your own individual history that.makes you. You own free choices. .Slavoj Zizek was born in Slovenia in 1949.
Today, he is the most important figure who.subscribes to a history-based philosophy.
He identifies himself as a Hegelian who argues.that Marxism has failed miserably because
most Marxists today live in the past, too.attached to history. Today’s Marxists blame
history for their failure. In other words,.he says that Marxists today have lost touch
with reality and live in the past like an.old man who has failed in his life projects.
This failure is most visible in his own style.as he uses comedy to cope with that failure.
His philosophy is based on a philosophical.irony. Marxists believe in history and historical
struggle. The very history that these philosophers.based their ideas failed their attempt to
create a truly socialist society. So history.failed a philosophical tradition that based
its core philosophy on history. Now that’s.ironic. And so on and so on and so on. You
get the point.  .So to sum up, Hegel said we are the product
of history that keeps progressing and Marx.said let’s not study history but let’s
speed it up to get our final destination:.a communist utopia. Sartre argues forget about
class history, we are the product of our own.individual history in which we also find our
purpose, and finally Zizek says history has.failed us all. We have not progressed but
regressed. So our history is nothing but a.history of failed intelligence or rationality. .Next, I will discuss the other strand of philosophy
that came out of Kant through Schopenhauer,.Kierkegaard, and Nietzsche which emphasizes
not rationality or history or society, but.passion, or will or human psyche, the mysterious
subconscious world of psychological philosophy. .Psychological Philosophy: Schopenhauer vs
Kierkegaard vs Nietzsche vs Peterson [Passion.Motivates Us]
Previously I discussed the branch of philosophy.that put emphasis on historical and social
change as the main motivating factors for.human actions. For example philosophers like
Hegel, Marx and Sartre argued that we are.the product of history, either society’s
history or our own personal history. In this.segment, I will focus on the other branch
of philosophy that’s based on the individual.human psyche or the blind will that drives
human actions. In other words, it is not history.or society but some other mysterious forces
inside us, like passion and the blind subconscious.will. .The German philosopher, Arthur Schopenhauer
who lived between 1788 and 1860 was firmly.against Hegel’s philosophy. Schopenhauer
took Kant’s distinction between the knowable.world of phenomena and the unknowable world
of noumena to develop his own theory of Will.and Representation. Schopenhauer argued that
there is no distinction between the two worlds,.they are one and the same thing or two sides
of the same coin. He said there is one world,.which he called it will. But this will is
mysterious and hard to understand. It’s.built-in inside us. In other words, all living
beings and even non-living beings come pre-assembled.or pre-installed with this blind will. Since
it’s built-in inside each being, we cannot.fully know. We can only know how it is represented
or manifested to us, but not the will itself..The will itself is hidden from us, all we
see is its mere representation. .For Schopenhauer, will is the blind driving
force in the universe and representation is.our perception of that blind will. In other
words, will is the essence of the universe.and we only see or understand its manifestation
in us. He called it will to life. Or passion.for life that we share with all living beings,
including animals and plants. We all have.an innate will to continue living. Since the
will is blind and universal, we each become.its eye through which it looks out to the
world. Will is like a gigantic iceberg while.our human intellect or human perception of
it is only the tip of that iceberg. So Schopenhauer.really went deeply psychological about human
motivation. .Schopenhauer says it is impossible to know
the will, because as soon as you observe it,.it becomes a representation of that will.
If you do not observe it, then it is the will..It’s like in quantum mechanics, your observation
of a particle changes the position of the.particle. In other words, if you don’t look,
it is there, but as soon as you look, it changes.position. So it is a kind of catch 22. To
understand Schopenhauer’s idea of the will.is to imagine everything in the universe is
one thing, let’s say atoms that oscillate.between everything that exists. It appears
to us as something that is not the genuine.thing, but a mere representation. .To fully understand Schopenhauer’s will,
it is important to mention the Buddhist idea.of the self as an illusion or mirage. For
the Buddhists soul is universal but the self.is a mere mirage we acquire in our lifetime.
In other words our essence is not the self.we call me or I. Schopenhauer too, places
the blind will at a much deeper place than.we can understand and we only get a representation
of it. .He also said that this will is the cause of
our human suffering, therefore Schopenhauer.is often considered the father of pessimism.
Just like in Buddhism our ego desires things.and those desires make us suffer, because
we can never satisfy our desires fully. Schopenhauer.says since we have a body, we have a will
that somehow controls us and that causes suffering,.so we are all at the mercy of this blind will
that urges us to do things. The only way to.cope with this suffering is through intellect
and art which allow us to move to a state.of non-existence like the Buddhist nirvana.
Artists while creating art as well as us while.enjoying that art, we all experience a moment
of non-being while in awe of its beauty. When.an art takes our breath away, we truly experience
non-existence, a kind of blissful moment..Schopenhauer influenced the German composer
Richard Wagner whose music represents Schopenhauer’s.philosophy. For Schopenhauer music didn’t
represent the phenomenal world, therefore.it was free from the will and urges, instead
it fostered compassion. Schopenhauer had a.massive influence on novelists and musicians
of the 19th century. He also influenced psychoanalysts,.especially Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung. Schopenhauer
also dismissed the idea of god and replaced.god with the blind will and this had an influence
on our next philosopher. .The Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard lived
between 1813 and 1855. He argued that our.anxiety comes from our choices or in other
words our belief in complete freedom to make.such choices. In a world where everyone believes
in god, where everything is caused by god,.people accept it because there is no other
choice. In other words, God tells you what.to do and what not to do. You have no choice
of your own. .But we live in a world, where we no longer
believe in god, so we have the freedom to.choose. But this freedom comes at a massive
psychological cost. It makes us anxious about.our choices and the consequences of those
choices. When we are children, we live a care-free.life because our parents take care of everything.
In the same way, a god fearing society also.lives in a kind of blissful ignorance. Since
god is dead, or when parents die, we are responsible.to make our own choices. The psychological
toll of making choices is immense on us. For.example, Hamlet agonizes over the question
of “To be or not to be” in Shakespeare’s.play. Incidentally Hamlet was also a Dane
like Kierkegaard. .In the 19th century, hysteria was very prevalent,
especially among women. Today, anxiety is.more common, among both men and women. So
absolute freedom makes us anxious. Kierkegaard.himself never lost faith in god, but he saw
freedom as good and bad. While it makes us.anxious and dizzy, it also allows us to make
good moral choices. His problem with Hegel’s.theory of history was that it gave little
room for individual freedom because we are.bound by the historical force. In fact we
suffer, not because of the bigger forces in.society, but we suffer through our own actions
or choices we make as individuals. .So Schopenhauer said the blind will motivates
us while leaving us with minimum freedom of.our own and Kierkegaard said that little freedom
induces anxiety in us. Now these two philosophers.come together in our next philosopher. .The German philosopher, Friedrich Nietzsche
lived between 1844 and 1900. He was a great.admirer of Schopenhauer. He accepted Schopenhauer’s
idea of the will, but he had a big problem.with how passive this will to life was. Nietzsche
argued that this will, blind it may be, can.be harnessed and utilized for great purposes,
artistic genius and philosophical flourishing..He changed the passive “will to life”
into a proactive “will to power”. In other.words, we are not here to just live, but we
are here to grow, conquer and dominate. Nature.is based on competition not a state of blissfulness
or mere survival..Nietzsche saw religions, especially its morality
as the biggest obstacle for individuals to.push boundaries in order to achieve greatness.
Morality decides what’s good and what’s.bad, so society promotes certain values and
restricts others. Nietzsche saw this as a.weak-minded way of living that promoted a
weak or slave mentality. He instead proposed.a more nature-based approach, in which no
morality can restrict innovation, probing,.artistic creativity and philosophical ideas.
Nature wants to grow, dominate, while religions.suppress and tame people. .Nietzsche proposed the idea of ubermensch,
a being who has surpassed humanity into something.else, a free spirit artist or a philosophical
genius. He’s no longer bound by social values.and norms because he has shed his human qualities
of weakness, slave mentality and religious.compassion. He is released from all that into
a state of enormous creative energy and exuberance.for life. .Nietzsche saw western philosophy championing
rationality at the expense of passion and.emotions. For him passion was as important
as reason. Reason is just a tool, it provides.us with technology that makes life easier
and more comfortable. But reason cannot motivate.us to do things that are daring and courageous.
Instead rationality makes us risk-averse..This timidness leads us to hedonism in which
we only seek pleasure and avoid pain. This.is a kind of nihilistic self-indulgence that
makes you lazy and self-centred. .Human passion, on the other hand, motivates
us to do things, conquer the world and topple.mountains. So Nietzsche’s philosophy was
based on human passion or the will to power.to surpass the current humans into a great
genius. Nietzsche didn’t believe in equality.either, because only a handful of people could
become great artists and genius philosophers..Not everyone has original ideas. .So Schopenhauer placed human motivation on
the blind innate will, while Kierkegaard said.our anxiety comes from the little freedom
we experience and Nietzsche argued we are.driven by will to power or passion to push
society forward and innovate. .Today, sociology and psychology have replaced
philosophy when it comes to human motivation..One of the leading voices of psychology is
Jordan Peterson was born in 1962 and has adopted.YouTube as his platform. Another contemporary
voice is the Indian yogi Sadhguru. Peterson.believes in human passion and faith telling
young people to take individual responsibility..Unlike Zizek, Peterson doesn’t see the world
through group identity like class, or gender.but through the lens of the individual. His
idea of perception is somewhat similar to.Schopenhauer’s will and representation. .Sadhguru, an Indian yogic guru, on the other
hand, argues that today’s world is shaped.by materialism and people have conflated the
desire for more with happiness. Our goal is.no longer happiness, but to have more. He
argues it is time we reach a higher level.of intelligence so we are in charge of our
body, not our bodily desires in charge of.our mind. He argues that modern society, even
science, has become a slave to human bodily.desires to make us more comfortable. As a
result it has blinded us from other possibilities.of human intelligence or human consciousness
to reach higher places.  .So to sum up, Schopenhauer said we are driven
by a universal will or passion for which we.have no control and this causes us to suffer
and art is our best cure for suffering. Kierkegaard.argued that our anxiety or suffering is also
caused by our freedom of choices in life,.which kind of negates Schopenhauer’s blind
will. Nietzsche said, this human passion that.causes us suffering is also a great tool to
do something, create something and become.greater than ourselves. Peterson says to ease
suffering is to take responsibility and make.something of your individual life instead
of blaming others. Sadhguru argues for a new.form of human consciousness that goes beyond
the material world. .So to sum up, human philosophy in the last
2500 years has tried to answer many different.questions. Early Greeks tried empirical knowledge
to explain the world while early eastern philosophers.tried to psychologically cope with the problem
of existence. Then later philosophers tried.to explain life’s purpose, with the humanists
focusing on the equality among humans, while.the elitists or political realists emphasized
competition to push society forward. Then.Kant brought rationalism and empiricism together
and the next generations of Germans took him.in two separate directions, Hegel went historical
saying we are made by history while Schopenhauer.went deeper into the human psyche saying we
are made by a blind will. Perhaps today we.are moving towards a new philosophy that is
not based on reason but human intuition. .Conclusion: Coursework
To sum up this video, In part 1, I discussed.how human’s knowledge of death and the rise
of rational thinking gave rise to human philosophy.in an attempt to answer some of life’s fundamental
questions like the meaning of life, the nature.of reality and the function of the human mind.
Then over time each of those topics became.a discipline of its own and philosophy gave
birth to physics, biology and psychology..Physics focused on reality. Biology on life.
And psychology on the human mind. Later I.looked at the various branches of philosophy
such as ontology, epistemology, rationalism,.empiricism, humanism, utilitarianism, existentialism,
postmodernism and more. .In part 2, I discussed how eastern philosophy
was based around rivers and agriculture, therefore,.spirituality and fatalism became the dominant
philosophical ideas. Western philosophy, on.the other hand, was based on oceans and trade
which focused more on rational thinking. The.fundamental difference is that eastern philosophy
emphasizes changing oneself while western.philosophy wants to change the world. I discussed
how the Greek giants of Socrates, Plato and.Aristotle questioned dogma and promoted rational
thinking. While the eastern trio of the Buddha,.Lao Tzu and Confucius showed how not to change
nature, but become one with nature by changing.yourself. .In part 3, I discussed the purpose of human
civilisation and human life. Elitism sees.society as a competition ground while egalitarianism
promotes equality. Philosophers such as Sun.Tsu, Machiavelli, Thomas Hobbes saw humans
as animals so they offered a hierarchical.social system to mimic nature, where the most
adept survive. Philosophers such as Jean-Jacque.Rousseau, and Voltaire promoted equality instead.
On the question of knowledge or happiness,.Erasmus, Montaigne, and Bertrand Russell argued
one should prioritise happiness, while philosophers.such as Francis Bacon, Heidegger, and Foucault
prioritised knowledge to better one’s life.and understand the nature of society. .In part 4, I tackled the question of knowledge
by discussing rationalism and empiricism..Rationalists see knowledge as innate inside
us while empiricists see knowledge only coming.from outside experience. Kant provided a middle
ground saying we have innate mental structures.that we put out to the world to give us a
more structured understanding of the world..In other words, we are not passive receivers
but active organisers of the world. I also.discussed what shapes us and motivates our
action. Hegel and Marx’s history-based philosophy.argued we are the product of history and Jean-Paul
Sartre who said we are the product of our.own individual history. On the psychological
side, we saw Schopenhauer who placed human.motivation in the subconscious blind will.
Kierkegaard focused on how freedom creates.its anxiety. Nietzsche said we can channel
the blind will and use this anxiety to create.art..If you have made it to this point, a huge
kudos to you. So my question to you. Which.philosophy or philosopher resonated with you
the most? Or a more interesting question is,.where do you see philosophy heading? As always
I appreciate you accompanying on this long.journey..